Astanga Hridaya Sutra Sthan Vagbhat
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 1: Ayushkameeya HTSHTAT Adhyaya “Desire for long life” 1. Salutations WAM Va AAAI RAL NSH ACT TH FAAS TR Pele SST ELA ay ayddears aat seq vee Salutation to The Unique and Rare Physician, who has destroyed, without any residue all the diseases like Raga (lust, anger, greed, arrogance, jealousy, selfishness, ego), which are constantly associated with the body, which is spread all over the body, giving rise to disease, delusion and restlessness. This salutation is done to Lord Dhanwantari. 2. Purpose of life: Essential quality to learn Ayurveda Sy: HATTA Ta Beare | sedatreery fatra: GTaTER: I ayu: kamayamanena dharmartha sukhasadhanam | ayurvedopadesesu vidheya: paramadara: || To achieve the purpose of life, that is 1. Dharma — following the path of righteousness 2. Artha— earning money in a legal way 3. Kama — fulfilling our desire 4. Moksha — achieving Salvation, To achieve this purpose of life, one should concentrate on having a long life. To learn the science of Ayurveda, which explains how to achieve this purpose, ‘obedience’ (Vidheya) is the most important quality. 3. Origin of Ayurveda sem Taca sre ag sorafsatsaeca saat ct seat at argarigareactect afsraenieaiedt © yap aeaior afay Lord Brahma, remembering Ayurveda, taught it to Prajapathi, he in turn taught it to Ashwini Kumaras (twins), they taught it to Sahasraksa (Lord Indra), he taught it to Atri’s son (Atreya Punarvasu) and other sages, they taught it to Agnivesa and others and they (Agnivesha and other disciples ) composed treatises, each one separately. Page No. 2 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 4—4.5. Funda of Ashtanga Hrudayam: asa afafarhedea: wa: aNeredafead seasagad afasaraiaea From those Ayurvedic text books, which are too elaborate and hence very difficult to study, only the essence is collected and presented in Ashtanga Hridaya, which is neither too short nor too elaborate. 4.5-5.5 — Branches of Ayurveda PRATTHCAST MEET SIGHT || HSerazarifet TRAE: Fafercar ay Aisa | kayabalagrahordhvanga Salyadamstra jaravrsan || astavangani tasyahu: cikitsa yesu samsrita | Kaya Chikitsa — General medicine Bala Chikitsa — Paediatrics Graha Chikitsa — Psychiatry Urdhvanga Chikitsa — Diseases and treatment of Ear, Nose, Throat, Eyes and Head (neck and above region) Shalya Chikitsa — Surgery Damshrta Chikitsa — Toxicology Jara Chikitsa — Geriatrics Vrushya Chikitsa — Aphrodisiac therapy Peyr PANN These are the eight branches of Ayurveda. 5.5 — 6.5 Tridosha ary: ed awedic sat ater: Tara: i fapansfapar cs cafea a acdaied z | vayu: pittam kaphasceti trayo dos: samasata: || vikrta’vikrta deham ghnanti te varttayanti ca | Vayu — Vata, Pitta and kapha are the three Doshas of the body. Perfect balance of three Doshas leads to health, imbalance in Tridosha leads to diseases. 6.5-7.5 How Thridosha are spread in body and in a day? a caftetsh gramsaneraeaeg Gara: Il seer AsecAATiGM: HAT | te vyapino’pi hrnnabhyoradhomadhyordhva samsraya: || vayo’horatribhuktanam te’ntamadhyadiga: kramiat | The Tridosha are present all over the body, but their presence is especially seen in particular parts. If you divide the body into three parts, the top part upto chest is dominated by Kapha Dosha, between chest and umbilicus is dominated by Pitta, below umbilicus part is dominated by Vata. Page No. 3 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Similarly, in a person’s life, day and in night (separately), the first part is dominated by Kapha, second part is dominated by Pitta and third part is dominated by Vata. While eating and during digestion, the first, second and third part are dominated by Kapha, Pitta and Vata respectively. 7.5 Types of digestive fires astaciasa: deol weqeaita: wa: wa: Il tairbhavedvisama: tiksno mandascagni: samai: sama: || There are four types of Digestive fires (Agni) 1. Vishama Agni -— Influenced by Vata. A person with Vishama Agni will sometimes have high appetite, and sometimes, low appetite. 2. Teekshna Agni - Influenced by Pitta. A person with Teeksna Agni will have high digestion power and appetite. 3. Manda Agni - Influenced by Kapha. A person with Manda Agni will have low digestion power and appetite. 4. Sama Agni - Influenced by perfect balance of Tridosha — Where person will have proper appetite and digestion power. Digestion occurs at appropriate time. 8.5 Types of digestive tracts / nature of bowels ass: ART AqHeal AeA: Eaect: TERT | kostha: kriro mrdurmadhyo madhya: syattai: samairapi | There are three types of digestive tracts (Koshta): 1. Kroora Koshta — wherein the person will take long time for digestion. The bowel evacuation will be irregular. It is influenced by Vata. 2. Mrudu Koshta — Sensitive stomach, has a very short digestion period. Even administration of milk will cause bowel evacuation. 3. Madhya Koshta — Proper digestive tract, bowel evacuation at appropriate times. It is influenced by Tridosha balance. 9-10 Types of Prakruti— Body Types gerard: searat fateta frspel: | dea fea: wpa serereatcaar: Fas | Aad: TAA Aor feteca afaarvat Il Sukrartavasthai: janmadau visenaiva visakrme: || taiSca tisra: prakrtayo hinamadhyottama: prthak | samadhatu: samastasu Srestha nindya dvidosaja || Like the poison is natural and inherent to poisonous insects, similarly, the Prakruti (body type) is inherent to humans. The body type is decided during conception, based on qualities of sperm and ovum. Vata prakruti— Vata body type is considered as low quality Pitta Prakruti— Pitta body type is considered as moderate quality Kapha Prakruti— Kapha body type is considered good quality. Page No. 4 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Tridosha body type — influenced equally by Vata, Pitta and Kapha is considered the best quality. Dual body types, Like Vata-Pitta, Pitta-Kapha, Vata-Kapha body types are considered as not good. 10.5 Qualities of Vata oa wat og: eit: GE: AeEATettsietet: Il tatra riikso laghu: Sita: khara: stiksmascalo’ nila: || Rooksha — dryness, Laghu — Lightness, Sheeta — coldness, Khara — roughness, Sookshma — minuteness, Chala — movement These are the qualities of Vata. 11. Qualities of Pitta fed Bets cleviteor oy fre A aay | pittam sasneha tiksnosnam laghu visram saram dravam | Sasneha — slightly oily, unctuous, Teekshna — piercing, entering into deep tissues, Ushna — hotness, Laghu — lightness, Visram — bad smell, sara — having fluidity, movement, drava — liquidity are the qualities of Pitta. 12. Qualities of Kapha Feaser etal aera: erevit acer: FRE: HH: Il snigdha: sito gururmanda: slaksno mrtsna: sthira: kapha: || Snigdhna — oily, unctuous, Sheeta — cold, Guru — heavy, Manda — mild, viscous, shlakshna — smooth, clear, Mrutsna — slimy, jely, sthira — stability, immobility are the qualities of Kapha. Tet: Bieta ceased: The increase, decrease of individual Doshas, or imbalance of couple of these Doshas is called as Samsarga. And imbalance of all the three Doshas together is called as Sannipata. 13. Body tissues and waste products TH HGH AM Aer HEA Asst Uwe eda: | ad Ga: Hel: AT Wha FaateaishA a Il rasa asrk mamsa medo asthi majja Sukrani dhatava: | sapta diisya: mala: mitra Sakrt svedadayo’pi ca || Body tissues and waste products are called as Dushyas. Means, there are influenced, and affected by Doshas. Body tissues are - Page No. 5 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 1. Rasa - the first product of digestion, Soon after digestion of food, the digested food turns into Rasa. It is grossly compared to lymph or plasma. But it is not a complete comparison. Rakta — Also called as Asruk. — Blood Mamsa — Muscle Meda - Fat tissue Asthi - Bones and cartilages Majja - Bone marrow Shukra — Semen / Ovum or entire male and female genital tract and its secretions are grossly covered under this heading. NAW YD Mala — waste products Shakrut / Pureesha — (faeces), Sweda (sweat) and Mootra (urine) are the three waste products of the body. 13.5 Nature of increase and decrease gfe: ware: ater faakte: farce: | vrddhi: samanai: sarvesam viparitai: viparyaya: | Equal qualities lead to increase, and opposing qualities lead to decrease. For example, dryness is the quality of Vata. Ifa Vata body type person exposes himself to dry cold weather, his dryness and in turn Vata will increase, leading to dry skin. In the same way, oiliness is opposite quality of dryness. If he applies oil to the skin, then the dryness and related Vata is decreased. 13.5 Six tastes TH: FACAFAAAAFA TPA IS FAAS T aang aeraer: Svadu — Madhura — sweet, Amla — Sour, Lavana — Salt, Tikta — Bitter, Ushna — Katu — Pungent, Kashaya — Astringent are the six types of Rasa. They are successively lower in energy. That means, Sweet taste imparts maximum energy to body and the astringent, the least. 14. Effect of tastes on Tridosha cae Aled talfed Fa: fAraey: HHA | aurea fara we: Aecaed at Hac Il tatradya marutam ghnanti traya: tiktadaya: kapham | kasaya tikta madhura: pittamanye tu kurvate || In the list of tastes, the first three, ie. Sweet, sour and salt mitigates Vata and increases Kapha. The last three, i.e. bitter, pungent and astringent tastes mitigates Kapha and increases Vata Astringent, bitter and sweet taste mitigates Pitta. Sour, salt and pungent tastes increase Pitta. Page No. 6 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Types of food substances: Shamana — Food that brings down the increased Dosha to normalcy Kopana — Food that increases the lowered Dosha to normalcy Swasthahita - Food that maintains the normalcy of Tridosha and health. Types of Potency (Veerya) Ushna veerya (Hot potency) -Some food items are hot in nature. For example pepper Sheeta veerya (cold potency) - Some food items are cold in nature. For example milk. These are the two types of potencies. Generally, substances that have Astringent, bitter and sweet tastes are coolant in nature and Sour, salt and pungent tastes are hot in nature. Three types of Vipaka Vipaka refers to conversion of taste after initial phase of digestion. e Madhura Vipaka (sweet) — Generally, Sweet, and salt tastes undergo this Vipaka. e Amla Vipaka (Sour) — Sour taste undergoes this Vipaka e Katu Vipaka — rest of the tastes — Bitter, astringent and pungent tastes undergo this Vipaka. 18. — Twenty types of qualities ae ee fear fearer eoeut aes AG eet: | apn: weer faerer: feefa: w farsa: I guru manda hima snigdha Slaksna sandra mrdu sthira: | guna: sasiiksma viSada: vimSati: sa viparyaya: || Guru(heavy) X laghu (light in weight) Manda(slow) X tiksna(quick, fast) Hima (cold) X ushna (hot) Snighda (unctuous) X ruksa (dry) Slaksna (smooth) X khara (rough) Sandra (solid) X drava (liquid) Mrdu (soft) X kathina (hard) Sthira (stable) X cala (moving, unstable) Suksma (stable, small) X sthula (big,gross) Vishada (non slimy) X picchila (slimy) 19. Cause for health and disease: arena ae seaaeataase: | waar fasta tare HRT Il kalarthakarmanam yogo hinamithyatimatraka: | samyagyogasca vijiieyo rogarogyaika karanam || Less, more or wrong unison of time, senses and functions is the reason for disease and the right unison of these three factors is the reason for health. (Explained detail in further chapters). Page No. 7 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 20. Definition of health and disease wr aIvayrs aT AFA FWTAT | rogastu dosavaisamyam dosa simyam arogati | Imbalance in Tridosha is disease. Perfect balance is health. 21. Types of disease: fetoteied fastster ca tem afaen yar: Nija roga — Disease caused due to imbalance in internal factors. For example, eating excessive hot substances, leading to gastritis. Agantu Roga - Disease caused due to external factors. Such as injuries. Both these types of disease can occur to body and mind. 21. Types of mental Doshas — as areactacrefcorrat aauncedaea Herat eat a aterqaredt Rajas — quality of mind, that drives us to take actions, Tamas — that leads to inaction and lethargy 22. How to test patient? avereatermedt: whet a Uo Darshana — by means of inspection, observation. Sparshana - by means of touching Prashna — by means of asking 23. Examination of disease: Disease should be examined by its Nidana -causes, aetiology, Pragrupa — Purvarupa— prodromal symptoms, premonitory symptoms Lakshana — Specific signs and symptoms, clinical features Upashayaa — diagnostic tests Apti— Samprapti-— Pathogenesis. Types of Habitat (Desha) syceusest aaraghe SMM AAA SAT J PHM ATI TAA UT sqeeraie re In this science, is said to be of two kinds - Bhumi desha — region of land and Dehadesha — the body. Bhumi desa - land region is of three kinds of viz, Jangala -which is predominant of vata—arid or desert-like land with no mountains or hills, has less vegetation, poor water resourses and is more breezy. Anupa- which is predominant of kapha - marshy land with more of water, more vegetation , very less of sunlight and heat. Sadharana which has all Tridosha in balance - moderate type with few mountains , hills, moderate water, vegetation and sunlight. Page No. 8 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kinds of time: afecaeaaqeen oT aprelt aaa Two kinds are considered- one is normal time, another — stages of diseases. 25-26 Types of medicines: gheret eaet Ufa Tare sitver |faer | etkareit arse Hato UAtserT | afta: fatat aaa cen der yet Ae: Il Sodhanam Samanam ceti samasat ausadham dvidha || Sarirajanam dosanam kramena paramausadham | basti: vireko vamanam tatha taila ghrtam madhu: || There are two types of medicines. 1. Shamana - Palliative treatment — which brings the Dosha to normalcy, useful in initial stages of diseases 2. Shodhana — Purification treatment — which expels imbalanced Dosha out of body. — Useful in aggravated stages of diseases. Examples: For Vata — Basti (suppositories) is the Shodhana treatment, and oil is Shamana treatment. For pitta — Virechana (Purgation) is Shodhana and Ghee is Shamana. For Kapha — Vamana (emesis) is Shodhana and Honey is Shamana. 26. Treatment for mental imbalance: hlatcaiefaaret Aetarsteer wT Dhee — improving intelligence Dhairya — improving courage Atmavijnana — Self realization are the means to treat mental imbalance. 27-29. 16 factors of treatment. - Chikitsa Chatushpada fy geaequeenn Wet weaeeaay Pafrcrcaes feriese, wee Teaser - Bhishag (Doctor), Dravya (medicine), Upastha (Nurse) and Rogi (patient) are the four factors in treatment. Each of these four have further four qualities. Page No. 9 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Qualities of doctor: gat: cafcaenearll eseaat efafstea Daksha — Alert, disciplined Shastra — Having detailed knowledge about diseases and treatment. Drushtakarma — Having practical experience Shuchi— Cleanliness Qualities of medicine: agaed agat Wet Beaalsery Bahukalpa — Ability to formulate in different dosage forms, like decoction, powder, herbal oil ete Bahuguna — Having enormous qualities Sampanna — Endowed with virtues Yogya - suitable and appropriate for specific diseases. Qualities of nurse: Hea: aracait gear Ware: Anurakta — Compassion towards patients Shuchi— Cleanliness Daksha — Alert, active Buddhiman — Intelligence Qualities of patient seat Veit Prssagar wT: ecarety Adya - Rich Bhishagvashya — 100 % obedience towards doctor Jnapaka — Good memory Satvavaan — Having good strength to tolerate disease and treatment. Types of diseases: meat sreree sft eanfeicfaen ct q yardiaerganes: Hogareaea, area aVaeyIsHA: Two main types, which are further divided into two types. Sadhya - Which can be cured. It is of two types — Easy to cure (Sukha Sadhya), Difficult to cure (Krichra Sadhya) Page No. 10 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Asadhya - Which can not be cured. It is of two types — Yapya (medicine is required for as long as patient is alive), Anupakrama (nothing can be done. ) Qualities of diseases which can be cured easily: water 6s Yat: Gat rarest AAT seus cada WIE HTT HIPAA Pa: MEMFT TS ATTACH ATA Ta: TST: Sarvaushadha kshame dehe — The body of patient is able to tolerate all types of medicines Yunaha — Young patient Jitatmanaha — Patient having good control over sense organs, who follows abstinence Amarmaga — If the disease is not affected sensitive areas like brain, heart, kidney Alpahetu — If the cause for disease is mild Alparoopa — Mild symptoms Anupadrava — no complications. Atulya dushya desha rutu prakruti— Ifthe Dosha involved, Dhatu (body tissue) involved, Desha (place), Rutu (season) and Prakruti (body type) are not influenced by one particular Dosha, Pada sampadi - If all the sixteen qualities of Doctor, patient etc explained above are present, Graha anuguna - If astrology is in favour of the patient Eka Doshaja - Disease due to only one Dosha Eka Marga - If only one body channel is affected Nava - Disease of recent origin / onset. 32. qualities of difficult-to-treat diseases greaieetat: Pes: AHL T dal AEMIcaayy sey: weasgrTearssy HPIHH Va CaiceU HeseciarasieyraAten tee, FSTRTCY Haat: Disease which require the use of sharp instruments etc. in treatment . and also those which have mixture of factors enumerated in previous verses are krechra sadhya (curable with difficulty ). Diseases which have features entirely opposite of curable diseases, which have stayed for long period of time, involving all the important tissues and vital organs, which have produced anxiety (fear of death), delusion and restlessness; which are presenting fatal signs and which causes loss of sense organs are impossible to cure. (Anupakrama ), which require no therapy, fit to be rejected, sure to cause death. 33. Patient worth rejection: ariant Peseidfase dui fas afavegeivarc cugafata waryyras elenay site The physician should reject the patient, who is hated by physician and the king and who hates them; who hates himself (dejected in life), who is not having the equipments and other facilities required for treatment, who is busy with other activities, not having the required attention, leisure etc. towards the treatment, who is disobedient (to the physician), whose life is coming to an end, who is of evil mind (violent, destructive), who is afflicted with great grief, who is full of fear, who is ungrateful and who thinks himself to be a physician (in respect of deciding drug, therapies, food, activities etc) . Page No. 11 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan List of other chapters. TARR WH ddl aeyd Hearse: I. SUTRASTHANA Rill SDT ACIS MMAR: Hee ATTA CAT ATA CAT TATA fe MTA RAG ACT FEM IAT: Ae eA EAS FAG LATA ete APATITE Pa he ode ARMA IERTTA fe: create: eeaamibanttataeccat Hearne, CHIDARWNE BPNYNNNNNNNNNEE eee eee SSBADANDHEBONHKSOSCHADAAKRBNHHAS . Ayuskamiya adhyaya (desire for long life). . Dinacarya adhyaya (daily regimen). . Rtucarya adhyaya (seasonal regimen). . Roganutpadaniya adhyaya (prevention of diseases). . Dravadravya vijnaniya adhyaya (knowledge of liquid materials). . Annasvarupa vijnaniya adhyaya (nature of food materials). . Annaraksadhyaya (Protection of foods). . Matrasitiyadhyaya (Proper quantity of food). . Dravyadi vijnaniya adhyaya (Knowledge of substances etc.). . Rasabhediya adhyaya (classification of tastes). . Dosadi vijnaniya adhyaya (Knowledge of dosas etc.). . Dosabhediya adhyaya (classification of dosas). . Dosopakramaniya adhyaya (treatment of the dosas). . Dvividhopakramaniya adhyaya (two kinds of treatments). . Sodhanadigana sangraha adhyaya (groups of drugs for purificatory therapies etc.). . Sneha vidhi adhyaya (oleation therapy). . Svedavidhi adhyaya (sudation therapy). . Vamana virecana vidhi adhyaya (emesis and purgation therapies). . Basti vidhi adhyaya (enema therapy). . Nasya vidhi adhyaya (nasal medication). . Dhumapana vidhi adhyaya (inhalation of smoke therapy). . Gandusadi vidhi adhyaya (mouth gargles and other therapies). . Ascyotana-anjana vidhi adhyaya (eye drops, collyrium therapies). . Tarpana-putapaka vidhi adhyaya (satiating the eye and other therapies). . Yantra vidhi adhyaya (use of blunt instruments). . Sastra vidhi adhyaya (use of sharp instruments). . Siravyadha vidhi adhyaya (venesection). . Salyaharana vidhi adhyaya (removal of foreign bodies). . Sastrakarma vidhi adhyaya (surgical operation). . Ksaragnikarma vidhi adhyaya (alkaline and thermal cautery). Page No. 12 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan II. SARIRA STHANA (SECTION ON ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY ETC). anhaeac sas ciceeara STATA Hieapicleat TESA 1. Garbhavakranti sarira (embryology). 2. Garbhavyapad sarira (disorders of pregnancy). 3. Anga vibhaga sarira (different parts of the body). 4. Marma vibhaga sarira (classification of vital spots). 5. Vikrti vijnaniya sarira (knowledge of bad prognosis). 6. Dutadi vijnaniya sarira (knowledge of messenger etc.). III. NIDANA STHANA (DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES): Fetaret ATA eres ATA LaAT ASAT SATS AATNOT EFA ATACTO FACE ARES DISH Sea aa AAAS T VISIT . Sarvroga nidanam (diagnosis of diseases in general). . Jvara nidanam (diagnosis of fever). . Raktapitta, Kasa nidanam (disease and cough). . Svasa-Hidhma nidanam (diagnosis of bleeding disease and cough). . Rajayaksmadi nidanam (diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis etc.). . Madatyaya nidanam (diagnosis of alcoholic intoxication). . Arsas nidanam (diagnosis of haemorrhoids). . Atisara-~Grahani nidanam (diagnosis of diarrhoea and duodenal disorders). . Mutraghata nidanam (diagnosis of retention of urine). 10. Prameha nidanam (diagnosis of diabetes). 11. Vidradhi-Vrddhi-Gulma nidanam (diagnosis of abscess, enlargement of the scrotum and abdominal tumour). 12. Udara nidanam (diagnosis of enlargement of the abdomen). 13. Panduroga-sopha-visarpa nidanam (diagnosis of anaemia, dropsy and herpes). 14. Kustha-svitra-krimi nidanam (diagnosis of leprosy, leucoderma and parasites). 15. Vata vyadhi nidanam (diagnosis of diseases of the nervous system). 16. Vatasonita nidanam (diagnosis of gout). CHNIDAWRWNHE IV. CIKITSITA STHANA (THERAPEUTICS): fafaiead sat ted ears a a aeaiaat sees ata, Fare al, cat a afdfagatl aersocaegeiniaartyprotanrcatardnay Pahicnarcaaaraay eae: 1. Ivara cikitsita (treatment of fevers). 2. Raktapitta cikitsita (treatment of bleeding disease).3. Kasa cikitsita (treatment of cough). 4. Svasa-Hidhma cikitsita (treatment of dyspnoea and hiccup). 5. Rajayaksmadi cikitsita (treatment of pul. tuberculosis, etc.). 6. Chardi-Hrdroga-Trsna cikitsita (treatment of vomiting, heart disease and thirst). 7. Madatyaya cikitsita (treatment of alcoholic intoxication). Page No. 13 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 8. Arsas cikitsita (treatment of haemorrhoids). 9. Atisara cikitsita (treatment of diarrhoea). 10. Grahani dosa cikitsita (treatment of duodenal disorder). 11. Mutraghata cikitsita (treatment of retention of urine). 12. Prameha cikitsita (treatment of diabetes). 13. Vidradhi-vrddhi cikitsita (treatment of abscess, enlargement of the scrotum). 14. Gulma cikitsita (treatment of abdominal tumour). 15. Udara cikitsita (treatment of enlargement of the abdomen). 16. Pandu roga cikitsita (treatment of anaemia). 17. Svayathu (sopha) cikitsita (treatment of dropsy). 18. Visarpa cikitsita (treatment of herpes). 19. Kustha cikitsita (treatment of leprosy). 20. Svitra-krimi cikitsita (treatment of leucoderma and parasites). 21. Vata vyadhi cikitsita (treatment of diseases of the nervous system). 22. Vatasonita cikitsita (treatment of gout). V. KALPASIDDHI STHANA (PURIFICATORY RECIPES, PHARMACEUTICS): Houteta: Wert aifarner afcatesancwnaedecaal yal geaened: 1. Vamana kalpa (emetic recipes). 2. Virecana kalpa (purgative recipes). 3. Vamana virecana vyapat siddhi (management of complications of emesis and purgation therapies). 4. Basti kalpa (enema recipes). 5. Basti vyapat siddhi (management of complications of enema therapy). 6. Dravya-kalpa (pharmaceutics). VI. UTTARASTHANA: ae sora agcaat aeus, gat a aeriseare sx capfasielt, qat at aceka aayeraaitersreanyy zat, cat gat T Ua HviAMayUSRNIA, Asst srareataeeaat ay TER yerqaaeat sorsst Hey Ahy Caeraca hel sera astorarscr: . Balopacaraniya adhyaya (care of the new born baby). . Balamaya pratisedha (treatment of diseases of children). . Balagraha pratisedha (treatment of evil spirits). . Bhuta vijnaniya (knowledge of demons). . Bhuta pratisedha (treatment of demons). . Unmada pratisedha (treatment of insanity). . Apasmara pratisedha (treatment of epilepsy). . Vartma roga vijnaniya (knowledge of diseases of eyelids). . Vartma roga pratsedha (treatment of diseases of eyelids). 10. Sandhisitasita roga vijnaniya (knowledge of diseases of fornices, sclera and cornea). 11. Sandhisitasita roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of fornices, sclera and cornea). CHNIDAWRWNHE Page No. 14 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
12. 13. 14. 15. 16 18 23 25 30. 31 36 38 Drsti roga vijnaniya (knowledge of diseases of vision). Timira pratisedha (treatment of blindness). Linganasa pratisedha (treatment of blindness). Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sarvaksi roga vijnaniya (knowledge of diseases of the whole eye). Karna roga vijnaniya (knowledge of diseases of the ear). . Karna roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of the ear). 19. 20. 21. 22. Nasa roga vijnaniya (knowledge of the diseases of the nose). Nasa roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of the nose). Mukha roga vijnaniya (knowledge of the diseases of the mouth). Mukha roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of the mouth). . Siro roga vijnaniya (knowledge of the diseases of head). 24. Siro roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of the head). . Vrana pratisedha (treatment of ulcers). 26. 27. 28. 29. Sadyo vrana pratisedha (treatment of traumatic wounds). Bhanga pratisedha (treatment of fractures). Bhagandara pratisedha (treatment of rectal fistula) . Sarvaksi roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of the whole eye). 17. Granthi-arbuda-slipada-apaci-nadi vijnaniya (knowledge of tumours, cancers, filariasis, scrofula and sinus ulcer). Granthyadi pratisedha (treatment of tumours etc.). . Ksudra roga vijnaniya (knowledge of minor diseases). 32. 33. 34. 35. Ksudra roga pratisedha (treatment of minor diseases). Guhya roga vijnaniya (knowledge of diseases of genital organs) Guhya roga pratisedha (treatment of diseases of genital organs). Visa pratisedha (treatment of poisoning). . Sarpa visa pratisedha (treatment of snake bite poison). 37. Kitalutadi visa pratisedha (treatment of poison of insects, spider: . Musika-alarka visa pratisedha (treatment of poison of mouse, ra 39. 40. Rasayana vidhi (rejuvination therapy). Vajikarana vidhi (virilification therapy). End of first chapter of Sutrasthana of Ashtanga Hridayam. Page No. 15 's etc.). bid, dog etc.). Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 2: Dinacharya faaat Daily Routine This is the second Chapter of Ahstanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana — Called as Dinacharya — Ayurvedic daily routine. Dina means daily, Charya means — regimen/routine. This chapter covers mental, speech and physical aspects of well being, that you should follow every day. 1. PRATARUTHANA / GETTING UP IN THE MORNING TEA Aged Sietsoceaen aATATYS: Healthy person should get up from bed at Brahmi Muhurtha. That is, before dawn, or around 45 minutes before Sun rise, around 5—6 am. Last three hours of the night — from 3 am to 6 am — is known as brahma muhurta. 2-3 - DANTADHAVANA / CLEANING OF TEETH atkraedt rat paeitatatreda: HTM ATA LA SAH PITAL, Warm oT yeaa Horreng hraraHe aA TAA WOT SAE MST weeds SeqA eas Keeping in view, the condition of his body, the individual should pass urine and faeces, clean teeth with any of the twigs of following herbs — Arka (Calotropis procera), Vata (Ficus benghalensis), Khadira (Acacia catechu), Karanja (Pongamia pinnata), Kakubha (Terminalia arjuna). To use the twig as tooth brush, the thickness of the twig should be approximately equal to the tip of one’s little finger. It should be 12 Angula length. The tip of the twig should be chewed a little to make it as brush. The twig should be of astringent, pungent and bitter in taste. 4. Danta Dhawana Nishedha — Who should not brush teeth - TTeaTqohlaneeanrareasaadt Pores: HOA TAL The following individuals should not do teeth brushing. — people suffering from indigestion, vomiting, dyspnoea, cough, fever, facial paralysis, excessive thirst, ulceration of mouth, heart disease, diseases of eyes, head and ears. Page No. 16 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 5. Anjana — Collyrium didhasset frcs eaaevieadl sot | waEdsitaa aes Taree veroAay sa | BSAC ATASTA STATS TAS ST, | sauviramafjanam nityam hitamaksnostato bhajet | caksustejomayam tasya visesat Slesmato bhayam || yojayetsaptaratre’smat sravanartham rasafijanam | It is good to apply a special type of collyrium called Sauveera Anjana to the eyes. It should be applied daily. Rasanjana (aqueous extract of Berberis aristata), should be applied once in a week, to drain out Kapha (secretions) from the eyes. 6 - Navana and Gandusha SII SOME DORIC CEICELs - After collyrium application, healthy person should do Navana (Nasya — Nasal instillation of drops.). For this purpose, milk, herbal decoctions, herbal oils are usually used. After that, Gandusha — gargling with warm water, milk, or herbal decoction or herbal oil should be done. Then Dhuma — inhalation of smoke from herbs and spices should be done, and then betel leaves should be chewed. 7 — Contra indication for Tambula — betel leaf chewing — Gel Ta awatep Aaa fausorerdararres areorate Those suffering from wounds, bleeding diseases, dryness, redness of eye, poisoning, repeated unconsciousness, intoxication and from tuberculosis should avoid betel leaf chewing. 8-9. Abhyanga — oil massage HUSH HAN fers, FH OT THATS | eRe WAS Wve sy: Yea Bras aTeIHA IRR: saorTey Ft faster effort | asaiseagar: awarepes Hake soy: | abhyangam acaret nityam, sa jara Sramavataha | drsti prasada pusti Ayu: susvapna sutvak dardhyakrt || Sira: Sravanapadesu tam visesena Silayet | varjyo’bhyaiga: kaphagrasthakrta samsuddhi ajirnibhi: || Abhyanga means massage. It should be done daily, morning. It delays ageing, relieves tiredness and excess of Vata (aches and pains). It improves vision, nourishes body tissues, prolongs age, induces good sleep and improves skin tone and complexion. Massage should be specially done on ears, head and legs. Massage should be avoided when there is increase of Kapha in the body, soon after Shodhana (Panchakarma procedure) and during indigestion. Page No. 17 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 10. Vyayama — exercise aed waters acaisita: Aaa: ara: | fasteddarsacd CAAA STA | aacaraay Stet qaisshvtt ad ee | HRT fevered afer: ferseentarie: Weftaaret cect a, AeA Tat Hea | PeaissweTe cs ACA UT THe: Il laghavam karmasamarthyam dipto’gni: medasa: ksaya: | vibhaktaghanagatratvam vyayamat upajayate || vatapittamayo balo vrddho’jirni ca tam tyajet | ardhasaktya nisevyastu balibhi: snigdhabhojibhi: || sitakale vasante ca, mandameva tato anyatha | tam krtva’anusukham deham mardayet ca samantata: || Exercise brings about lightness, it improves work capacity, increases digestion power, burns fat. It brings body into good shape. People with diseases originating from Vata and Pitta, children, elders, people with indigestion problem should not do exercise. Exercise should be done till one’s half strength. Exercise should be done compulsorily by those having full strength and who take oily food stuff, From December to May. At the end of the exercise, one should undergo mild massage (pressing the body parts with mild to moderate pressure.) 11-14 Adverse effects of over-exercise: FSO ata: WaT Wdcd FA: FTA: siederarAd: areat saraiger ara Excessive thirst, emaciation, severe dyspnoea (difficulty in breathing), bleeding disorders, exhaustion, feeling of debility (even without any work), cough, fever and vomiting are caused by excess of exercise. TARTANA STATISTI ATS TAL art Ae saraver sareonfafaaeata Those who indulge in too much of exercise daily, who keep themselves awake till late nights, regularly, who walk long distances regularly, who indulge in excessive sexual activities, too much of laughing, speaking, and such other strenuous activities, will perish, just as a lion perishes after vanquishing an elephant. 15. Udvartana —(powder — massage) saddet HHS Aaa: widersaey | Reales seat cae Waaat WA | udvartanam kaphaharam medasa: pravilayanam | sthirikaranam anganam tvak prasadakaram param || Udvartana is using powder for massage. It helps to calm down aggravated Kapha, helps to burn fat. Hence it is one of the therapies that many Ayurvedic centers offer for anti-obesity treatment. Udvartana also brings in stability to body organs, improves strength and skin complexion. Page No. 18 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 16-18 — Snana — Bathing aeet GAaATGS Told Salt TIGA | HVS Ae AH TAG aesl Je ale Wea I dipanam vrsyamayusyam snanam irja balapradam | kandu mala srama sveda tandra trt daha papmajit || Bathing improves digestion, acts as aphrodisiac, prolongs life, increases enthusiasm and strength. It helps to get rid of dirt, waste products, sweat, tiredness, excessive thirst, burning sensation and microbes. SOTEGA HIPAA TIA Fellas: Pouring warm water over the body bestows strength, but the same over the head, makes for loss of strength of the hair and eyes. racers SoRPniaary 3 eareTterarsieayadaey Tae A Ay Bath is contra- indicated for those suffering from facial paralysis, diseases of the eyes, mouth and ears, diarrhoea, flatulence, rhinitis, indigestion and who have just taken food. 19. Sad Vritta — Good/healthy conduct: oief fea fet seared a donee Tere | at Af atest: Lael at ZifSrear Bea STA, || jie hitam mitam cadyat na veganirayet balat | na vegito anyakarya: syat na ajitva sadhyam amayam || Jeerne hitam mitam chaadyat — One should always eat, only after digestion of previous food, in limited quantity. Na vegan neerayet — one should not induce natural urges forcefully. Example: urinating, when there is no urge to pass urine. Na Vegito anya kaaryaha — one should immediately attend to natural urges, whenever they come, without being busy in other activities. One should undergo treatment to diseases as soon as possible. 20-21 Words of wisdom: Path of righteousness: Wart: asia Act: Hal: WaeTA: | AE a a fae Tate ae TARY aT Il sukhartha: sarvabhiitanam mata: sarva: pravrttaya: | sukham ca na vina dharmat tasmat dharmaparo bhavet || All the creatures are behind happiness. There is no happiness, without righteousness. Hence all should follow the path of righteousness. Page No. 19 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Tea Hearsay AaccaRaVAT: Friends should be served with affection and good deeds, whereas the others (wicked) should be kept at a distance. 22. 10 types of bad deeds fear Ede Hea ars tees gee sey | aieaea sera cara sfiea cH face Woe weffa agen arr as Aad: cata | himsa steya anyatha kamam paisunyam parusa anrte | sambhinna alapa vyapada abhidya drk viparyayam || papam karmeti dasadha kaya vai manasai: tyajet | These ten sins pertaining to the body, speech and mind should be avoided. Himsa (causing injury, torture etc.) steya ( stealing, robbing), anyathakama (unlawful sexual activity, desiring for others), paisunya (abusive or harsh speech ), parusha vachana (harsh speech) Anruta vacana ( speaking untruth), sambhinna alapa (speech causing separation, breaking of company), vyapada (quarrel, intention of harming ), abhidya (jealousy, not tolerating good of others) and drgviparyaya ( finding fault, misunderstanding, faithlessness etc. with scriptures, elders etc) Of these ten, the first three are related to body, next four- related to speech and last three — related with mind. 22-47 Hefecremneenarateteyate eer: Those who have no means of livelihood, who are suffering from diseases and who are afflicted with grief should be helped. BcAacddd TeAVSe apie Rrifornay srs ange seep ehtey Even the insects and ants should be seen with respect, similar to a physician, king and guests. faqs: pateorareas ae Beggars should not be disappointed, abused or objected. STERUCAT: FACTHRIL HAR AHIaaIeaHHT SaaS TT One should be very helpful even to his foes, even though they are not helpful. Sampat Vipatsu Eka manaaha: One should maintain a balanced mind both during calamity and prosperity. One should not be envious towards wealth and happiness of others. Page No. 20 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan are fect fact sureafesanie Serer Kale bruyat — speak only on the right occasion. Hitam bruyat — speak good words, be pleasant. Mitam bruyat — speak little, as per necessity. Do not argue, do not say untrue things. qaifisrel, gape: yer: HeoTEyG: Uae: u ath: ah, at waa faseet a ersfera: a apdercaa a alcaet wera gl VaRReatad a a fated wat: Purva abhibhashi _ be the first to greet, to start conversation sumukhaha — have a smiling face susheelaha — have good character karuna, mrudu: — be courteous, be soft in speech and activity. Na Eka sukhee — Do not be a person who likes to be alone always. Na sarvata: vishrabdo — do not believe everything around you Na shankhitaha — do not suspect everything around Do not instantly think someone as your foe or that he is a foe of someone else. Do not publicly talk about insults that you underwent, Do not publicly talk about disaffection towards your king (boss/ master / senior, in today’s context) FAIRAATART At aT TSA a atarada wrreattsa: Keeping in mind the nature of he people, one should deal with them in such manner as bet pleasing to them, becoming well-versed in the art of adoring others. a Wettefeaat a daeafaereta The sense organs should neither be strainedvery much nor should they be fondled or very much. Basieet anest sted afar Do not engage yourself in things that are devoid of three pursuits (dharma (righteousness), arha, (wealth) and kama (pleasure) ): should carry on the occupation without going contrary to them (dharma and karma). sea, waaay FeaATa, In all dealings (activities) one should adopt the middle mean only, avoid extremes. Page No. 21 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Personal hygiene: BIPNUGIC LOL Gb b Gb GE Tareeiiet: GRA: Fas Helesilasaer: One should cut his hair, nails, and moustaches regularly. Keep feet, ears, nose, eyes, urethra and anus clean Take bath daily, put on scents and good dress which is not superfluous but is pleasant to look at. SIEM CEILS freqaranes fara area art aust atet aerarey Wear precious stones, potent hymns and herbs (kept inside amulets) on the body. Walk holding an umbrella, putting on foot wear and looking straight to a distance of four arms length in front of you. In case of urgent work at nights, one should go equipped with a baton, head- dress and an assistant. FAG TETAS ACTA TT Ay APACSANTA CAAA aT A One should not invade on the shade of a holy tree on which deities reside (or a Buddhist shrine), materials (or men) of worship, banner and unholy thing, heap of ash, husk and dirt, sand dunes, boulders, places of bali (offering sacrifices to Gods, demons etc.) and bathing. et Reet AEF, Aide Hea aeaqstad gat a aANeaqseatad, One should not swim across rivers with arms, should not walk facing huge fire, should not travel in a risky boat, not climb a tree doubtful of strength; or ride on a vehicle, which is in bad condition. TAGS: Parcel i) ~ One should not sneeze, laugh or yawn without covering his mouth. aTieet a faprofarearrraratatra gar agateased fase, attatcnenigae One should not blow his nose (except for forcing out the dirty excretion); not scratch the ground without any reason, not do ugly movements of the parts of the body and sit on ones own heels for a long time. Page No. 22 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Seared Wes eeaaferadie Aer oaG TAL FASS One should stop the activities of the body, of speech and of the mind before getting exhausted; should not keep his knees above for long period (keeping erect folded at the knee while sleeping or standing on the hands keeping the legs up etc. ) aad Sat a ay FAM UcaTa AeA TOTAAL, Paled eae feat HTT a One should not reside at night on trees, meeting place of three roads, or places where people assemble for recreation, vicinity of a holy tree (or a Buddhist shrine), meeting place of four roads and temple, (house of god). One should not reside even during daytime, in a place of slaughter, a forest, haunted house and burial ground. wade aed, + AX AAT Fea aaa Yad Fea areawAeawrareTr a No one should gaze at the sun for a long time, should not carry heavy weight on his head, not see continuously objects which are minute, shining, dirty and unpleasant. Atafawmasetaaraele AIL One should not engage in selling, brewing, free distributing, or receiving of wine . ATA ATI AT TINT OT fet ore HAM: TASTE AAT RISA FIAIASE corre ee haart: SreaTaTAfeergoaa faaerecs: AetUeasAae NEA CACM Aa era, TAAASTOTARTO TTT HTT ACT EHT RTL area aatez SEAHAM STT A daifagsaneta oet YH ears Reaicated fasrrcadeet SG aT atl The person should avoid the direct breeze, sunlight, dust, snow(dew), hard breeze (whirlwind etc); should not sneeze belch, cough, sleep, dine or copulate in improper postures, should avoid the shade of a scaffold, places hated by the king (or government), company of wild animals, biting animals and those with horns; of mean, wicked (uncivilised and very intelligent persons); avoid quarrel with good men; avoid taking foods, sex, sleeping, study and recapitulation at the time of meeting of the night and Page No. 23 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan sunrise, Avoid the food given by enemies, given during sacrificial ceremony, (that offered by large group of donors of different castes), that given by prostitutes and merchants; one should not make sound with the body parts, mouth and nails, nor shake the hand and hairs; should not move in between two (receptacles of ) water, fire and the worshipful; should avoid the smoke of a cadaver; too much indulgence, in wine (drinking), believing and independence for (wicked) women. ara: waaserg site va fe eect: For an intelligent person the world is a teacher, hence one should imitate the world after carefully considering their meaning and effects of such actions. SAeMaM CAT: HATTA Sa: rartgia: weety sarcataie qaqa Compassion with all living beings, granting of gifts, controlling the activities of the body, speech and mind; feeling of selfishness in the interests of others (looking after the interest of others as his own) these are sufficient rules of good conduct. aediceniet A oied Hees seo GwHseA sald fet aeaieaeaia: He, who constantly thinks of how his day and night are passing and adopts the right way, will never become a victim of sorrow. SUTIN: TAR, F Waa AATAEL SRRRPaAaT Beit arenes Meacey Thus was enumerated, in brief the rules of good conduct; he who adopts it will (surely) attain long life, health, wealth, reputation and also the eternal world. Thus ends the chapter called Dinacarya, the second in sutrasthana of Astanga hrudaya composed by Srimad Vaghata, son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Page No. 24 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 3: Ritucharya adhyaya RITA Seasonal Regimen Ritucharya — Ayurvedic Seasonal Regimen Ritucharya is the 3rd chapter of Ashtanga Hrudayam. The word Ritucharya is made of two words — Ritu means seasons Charya means do’s and don’ts (regimen). This important chapter discusses in detail regarding different seasons and the regimen to be followed. Six Seasons — in the Ancient Ayurvedic Calendar - anidferetatarc’: sare Te Ha: Fa: RAR sr Tarawa sisal atenaiear: Reuss ava weey eR Mele UT, Alec a Wea Toy, A season (Ritu) is comprised of two months (two Masa). Shishira Ritu (winter, dewy season) — Magha and Phalguna (Mid January — Mid March) Vasanta Ritu (Spring season) — Chaitra and Vaishakha (Mid March — Mid May) Greeshma Ritu (Summer season) — Jyeshta and Ashadha (Mid May to Mid July) The above three Ritus form Uttarayana — Northern solstice. Here, fire is dominant. It is also called as Adana Kala, wherein the human strength is relatively low. Varsha Ritu (Rainy Season) — Shravana and Bhadrapada — Mid July — mid September Sharath Ritu (Autumn season) — Ashvayuja and Karthika — Mid September to Mid November Hemantha Ritu (Winter season) — Margashira and Pushya - Mid November to Mid January These three seasons form Dakshinayana — Southern solstice. It is also called as Visarga Kala, wherein the human strength will be relatively high. Uttarayana — Adana kala — Northern Solstice — mid January — mid July dRareacascheuisormen Areieasiad: sifeerraar: Blrarey avraiect qMel aa: faa: HITS: Heat Siete SF TAT HAT EATSTe TAT STA Because of the nature of the path, both the Sun and wind become very strong, powerful and dry during this half of the year. It takes away all the cooling qualities of the earth. Bitter, Astringent and Pungent tastes (Tikta, kashaya and Katu Rasas) will be more powerful, respectively, in the successive Ritus. Hence Adana Kala is dominated by fire. Page No. 25 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Dakshinayana — Visarga Kala — Southern Solstice — mid July — mid January Rea a ARTOTTeTSTA aieaeaast Ba fe seratel erred Ua: Fugverteret: efit: emecart Agere FPAMLASTEAAAIART afcteit TA: During this period, the Sun releases strength of the people. Here moon is more powerful, earth is cooled down due to clouds, rain and cold wind. Sour, Salt and sweet (Amla, Lavana and Madhura) tastes are dominant respectively during the three seasons of this period. Variation in strength as per season - ait sa, Gia wat Het ae, eA g reat: | Site agryam, vrsti gharme alpam balam, madhyam tu Sesayo: | Winter — Hemantha and Shishira — mid November — mid March — Highest strength Summer and rainy seasons — mid May — mid September — Lowest strength Spring and Autumn — Medium strength. 1. Hemanta Ritucharya — Ayurveda Winter regimen: Mid November — Mid January afert: efrereReagaed Waa Zot: AAT Mel A Tacs: Het A HRAAda FarearaeqavrsaeL During Hemantha, the people are strong, digestive fire becomes powerful, because it gets obstructed from flowing outward due to external winter. Like fuel consumes the things that it comes into contact, digestive fire may cause emaciation of body tissues. Hence, in this period, one should consume food predominant with sweet sour and salt tastes. ceatfereneneate Wats Fey farct: sagas Bese sale efrordad Ader sast Hat dot face, frye Here: ae gered T aera: As the nights are longer, person feels hungry early in the morning. So, after attending to oblutions, one should resort to Abhaynga (oil massage) with oils that have Vata balancing properties. Massage should be done especially to scalp and forehead. Mild massaging, wrestling till one’s half strength and trampling of the body is recommended. Page No. 26 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Heotedetetdd: Carat Benfater Hepa Teter vigeet sepeyfaa: Tare Rast vor yse aso ATL aeArscarseqeiteantael: eat: Adaedt cat dc, erat qalenz mrentistercnlearaotrent rare pray SUEGMTAAT A: WA: Ae satel FFA HHA FAG TGA T HET After this, oil is washed off with astringent powders and bathing. Then fine powder of Saffron and kasthuri (musk) is applied. The body is exposed to the fumes of aguru (Aquilaria agallocha) Since the digestion power is high, heavy-to-digest food such as meat soup mixed with fats, meat of well nourished animals, wine prepared with jaggery, supernatant part of wine (Sura) should be had more. Food prepared with wheat flour, black gram products of sugarcane and of milk, food prepared from freshly harvested corn, muscles, fat and edible oils should be partaken as food. Warm water should be used for oblutions, thick sheet made of cotton, leather, silk, wool or bark of trees that are light in weight should be used during sleep. Exposure to sunlight and fire should be resorted to, judiciously. Foot wear should be worn always. akecarersava: Wael: wae: far: Ried eaqpenssat yopspaatact: Women who have - well developed thighs, breasts, buttocks, who are enchanting, and exhilarated by the use of - fragrant fumes, scents, yuthfulness, and thus made warm in their body, who are liked, drive away the cold by their embrace. One may have sex as per his liking. FHSAA TACT S ITITATT: Mawes 7 ater rs ATA Persons who spend their time residing in houses kept warm by fire, in inner most apartment encircled with others, or in underground chambers, will not be affected by diseases due to cold and dryness. Overall, in Hemantha Ritu, the strength and digestion power are more. Hence one can exercise, undergo oil massage, eat heavy foods and may have sex. 2. Sisira Rutu charya — Ayurveda winter regimen — Mid January — Mid March: arama fare: art: RertshS faetva: | aar fe eas test wera Il ayameva vidhi: karya: SSire’pi visesata: | tada hi sitamadhikam rauksyam cadanakalajam || Even in shishira Ritu, the same regimen, as described above should be adopted with more intensity. During this period cold is severe and dryness more. Page No. 27 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 3. Vasanta Rutucharya (Ayurveda Spring regimen) — Mid March — Mid May ated fF MM aed seHreaisa: Sea He Hed Waa AAT TAL chaviguererearedcrewatea stot: SAATAACTTATET ACA LTLATOT A TUT, TAMA Bef ferec: HaeaaepSpA: Tearieraeneaes Pera after Parsasenneie, Meactaterosteaey aarp equresraed: Bea: Pret FetaTe TTA ECO C RN ATC ATT ATCT PSaTERIET ARIE Atarg seeleg Kapha which has undergone increase in Shishira (cold season) becomes liquefied by the heat of the Sun in Vasanta (spring). It diminishes the digestive fire (Agni) and gives rise to many diseases. Hence Kapha should be controlled quickly, by resorting to strong emesis therapy (Vamana Panchakarma procedure), Nasya (nasal medication) and other therapies. Food should also be chosen to mitigate Kapha, that are easily digestible and dry (moisture-free, fat-free). Physical exercises, dry massage and mild trampling should be done. Having thus mitigated the kapha, the person should take bath, anoint the body with the paste of karpura (camphor), candana (sandalwood), aguru (Aquilaria agallocha), and kumkuma (saffron). Have one year old barley, wheat and honey, meat of animals of desert-like land, and meat roasted in fire as food; Drink the juice of mango fruit mixed with fragrant substances, in the company of friends, getting it served by the beloved; the drink, thereby producing satisfaction. Beverages such as asava (fermented infusion), arista (fermented decoction), sidhu (fermented infusion), mardvika (fermented grape juice), or sarambu (extract of trees such as asana, candana etc.) or water mixed with honey, or water boiled with jalada (musta — Nut grass). 18-22 SgseetseLNy 3 pies ray ayscfaesey arrnaiecsiary E) eae) fear) afaageagary arrty qaieey TiscrRenteaaaacaed THAT ST The person should spend his midday in the company of friends engaged in pleasant games, pastimes, story telling etc., in forests (or gardens). The gardens should have cool breeze from south direction, with plenty of reservoirs of water all around, invisible or poor sunlight, the Page No. 28 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan land covered with shining crystals, with the cuckoo everywhere making pleasant sounds and engaged in love-play, with trees and different kinds of beautiful and sweet smelling flowers. apeeilaiearcaceth ATTRA, Avoid foods that are hard to-digest and cold, sleeping at day time, foods which are fatty, sour and sweet. Because, all these will increase Kapha. 4. Greeshma Ritucharya (Ayurveda Summer Regimen) Mid May — Mid July: crevrieptacernersiteay aferrcta a weae afrerd eerar det ager atic seh aftrrugacar rears, In Greesma (summer) the sun rays become powerful and appear to be destructive. Kapha decreases day by day and Vata increases consequently, hence avoid use of salt, pungent and sour foods, heavy physical exercises and exposure to sunlight, during this season. 26-27 sia adiesdt ay fearse et gay Betactakseragat Torearcrryel Ae TL Food which are sweet, light (easy to digest), fatty, cold and liquid should be taken, take cornflour mixed with cold water and sugar after taking bath in cold water. Indication for limited use of wine during summer: Fea Ft 48, 0a at cacd, gagart a | Heaer ee dew ae Ae Ha aa ll madyam na peyam, peyam va svalpam, subahuvari va | anyatha sopha Saithilya daha mohan karoti tat || 29 Madya (wine) should not be taken; if very necessary, taken in very little quantity or diluted with more quantity of water; if wine is taken in large doses, it will cause inflammatory conditions, and it will make the body fragile and weak, increases burning sensation and causes delusion. Hrerqudd wcaetasogset: Te: sad afaee Tare werasal Uleteh USI aT aaa GT oat Reeraet Teoraeaet Ge: SHEL Beltrorey During summer, boiled rice, which is white in colour, (like full moon) should be eaten along with meat of animals of desert. Meat juice (Mamsarasa) which is not very thick, Page No. 29 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Rasala (curds churned and mixed with pepper powder and sugar), Raga (syrup which is sweet, sour and salty) and Khandava (syrup which has all the tastes, prepared with many substances), Panaka panchasara, (syrup prepared with raisins (draksha), madhuka, dates (karjura), kasmarya, and parushaka fruits all in equal quantities, cooled and added with powder of cinnamon leaves, cinnamon and cardamom etc) and kept inside a fresh mud pot, along with leaves of plantain and coconut trees, and made sour (fermented) should be drunk in mugs of mud or shell; Very cool water kept in mud pot along with flowers of patala and karpura (camphor) should be used for drinking. WMMSHCel HSA Tateat HarAer ret aea ares eit deqereraeiaal Food articles like sasanka kirana (hollow, finger-like, fried pastry made of corn flour) should be taken at night; Buffalo milk mixed with sugar and cooled by moonlight and the stars should be used for drinking. 33-36 HASHIACIM eA A AwE TONAL, aay Araceae gaeacaHaMrary aieaiga wares He Aga HEARA MAHATMA Tt: ait: wierd cet wacPyIeas Hea AM: FIAERS HAT FETA AAS ATA AAA Day time should be spent in forests having tall trees reaching the sky such as shala (Shorea robusta, Tala — Borassus flabellifera etc, which obstruct the hot rays of the sun, or in houses around which bunches of flowers and grapes are hanging from their creepers. Sheets of cloth spreading sweet scented water, are arranged (to fan the air) , all around. Sleep on soft bed prepared with flowers of banana, kalbara, lotus etc. with fully blossomed flowers place all over. Spend the day remaining inside the house cooled by water fountains, water being scented with usheera (Cus Cus grass), and thereby relieve yourself from the heat of the sun. fereraxaerhrer atearysd fey a see Caeaftedes Ueaaees Arferet: PrqcATAA ACT THA ATA: soremMeageanter rege: seretrqer: seer Hacer strap eater: PRACAHATA ENT: Ae eca: Page No. 30 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Hellerporena: Rea: ATT: ear: FUNAIAA: Hea: WepedHAsste: asa so ote etfed afta: Fora Night regimen: At nights, one should sleep on the terrace, facing moonlight. Exhaustion due to heat of the day is relieved by, anointing the body with paste of sandalwood, wearing garlands, avoidance of sexual activities, wearing of very light and thin dress, by fanning with fans made of leaves of Tala or large leaves of padmini (lily) made wet; syringes sprinkling cool water softly, garlands of flowers of camphor, jasmine and of pearls and beads of white sandal paste, children, sarika (mynah bird) and shuka (parrot) talking pleasantly; beautiful woman wearing bangles of soft lotus stalk, blossoms of lotus in their hair, moving about nearby. 5. Varsha Ritu carya- (Ayurveda seasonal regimen for rainy season) — Mid July — Mid September: MeIMAT TAs Geol HTT Hah ast atigratea a Hegarargg HFaT FAINT ASAT ASAT elcteat T SSMU KAMThea Alot T ART aigadd oT Acta, ARacaeat aay, TAMING Taya T A In rainy season, the agni (digestive activity) is weak. It is already debilitated by summer, it undergoes further decrease and gets vitiated by the Doshas. The Doshas get aggravated by the effect of thick clouds full of water, cold wind having snow, dirty water because of rain, warmth of the earth and sourness. The poor strength of digestive activity the Doshas start vitiating one another and cause many diseases. Hence all general measures to mitigate imbalanced Doshas and to improve digestive activity should be adopted. 42-44 MEAs Aecepoiot Mes Cael Pare asaret RNA Bel ALAR Fea, aed aatderes at usaaterag ora feed alt oct aest sttotet cafegiéet AFAFAAIIEAS Heth ailgdeory One should undergo Panchakarma therapies. After that the person should also be administered asthapana basti (decoction enema therapy). He should use old grains for food, meat juice processed with spices etc. Meat of animals of desert-like lands, soup of pulses , wine prepared from grapes and fermented decoctions, which are old or mastu (whey, thin water or curds) processed with more of Sochal Page No. 31 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan salt and powder of panchakola, should be used. Rain water or water from deep wells, well boiled should be used for drinking. On days of no sunlight at all, the food should predominantly sour, salty and unctuous, dry, mixed with honey and easily digestible. 45-46 ‘4 seas Tacatsaehrataratstt Person should not move about on foot (move only on vehicles) should use perfumes, expose his clothes to fragrant fumes, dwell in upper stories of the house, devoid of heat, cold and snow. Aaa Hea S FACT AAT ATT TT Avoid - River water, udamantha (beverage prepared with flour of corns mixed with ghee), sleeping at daytime, exertion and exposure to Sun. 48 6. Sharath Ritucharya — (Ayurveda autumn regimen) — Mid September — Mid November: Adal Hiradt get Aed ene prac ASST Yet Teeret Teer Lara] The person becomes accustomed to the cold of rainy season. When he gets suddenly exposed to the warm rays of Sun, the Pitta, which has undergone increase in Varsha (rainy season) becomes greatly aggravated during sharath (autumn). In order to get over it, Tikta ghrita (medicated ghee recipe described in the treatment of kustha chapter 19 of Chikitsa sthana), purgation therapy and blood letting should be resorted to. 49 ‘2 fat Fag HIT a a eet soleay aferqeat RATA Tea When hungry, the person should take foods which are of bitter, sweet and astringent tastes, and easily digestible such as Rice, green gram, sugar, Amla, Patola, honey and meat of animals of desert-like lands. 50 2 Hamsodaka - aed ararerfeneet: efter eftarey TRA: | TAKA ASNT seesaw ferfaway | fa saad art fete Hefstsoreey || ameeafed at aT wat TeTIey seATA | taptam taptamsukiranai: sitam sitamsu raSmibhi: || samantat apyahoratram agastyodaya nirvisam | Suci hamsodakam nama nirmalam malajijjalam || nabhisyandi na va riiksam panadisu amrtopamam | The water which gets heated by the hot rays of the sun during day cooled by the cool rays of the moon during night, for many days continuously, which has been de-poisoned (detoxicated) by Page No. 32 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan the rise of the star Agatya, which is pure, uncontaminated and capable of mitigating the malas (dosas) is known as Hamsodaka. It is neither abhisyandi (producing more secretion or moisture inside the minute channels so as to block them) nor dry, such water is like Amrita (nector) for drinking and other purpose. 51-52 aren Rare sore: Evening should be spent on the terraces of houses which are white (by painting), anointing the body with the paste of Sandalwood, Cus Cus grass, Camphor, wearing garlands of pearls and shining dress and enjoying the moonlight. GIRCURSSIT TTL GLC CRISIS evr ea icareacot ATA Unease Avoid exposure to snow (mist), indulgence in alkaline substances, satiation with hearty meal, use of curds, oil, muscle fat, exposure to sunlight, strong liquors, sleeping at day time and the eastern breeze. 54 Use of taste as per season: ait ashy aeaetel aed Heal Terese Falg, felaTe, MAAS Fag far M THT Qe Vat ele THeeea: Beate TAMA fataAa ses During winters, (Hemanta and Shishira) and varsa (rainy season), Sweet, Sour and salt tastes should be especially used. Bitter, pungent and astringent tastes should be used more during vasanta (spring season), Sweet taste should be used more during Nidagha (summer); and Sweet, bitter and astringent tastes should be used during Sharath (autumn). Qualities of food as per season: The food and drink should be dry (moisture less, fat-less) during Sharat and Vasanta (autumn and spring) and food should be cold during gharma (summer) and ghnanta (end of rainy season) and should be hot in other seasons. 55-56. fact aaa: Faratesyangat Il nityam sarvarasabhyasa: svasvadhikyamrtavrtau || The habit of using all the six tastes every day is ideal for maintenance of health. However, during particular seasons, the particular tastes should be given special emphasis. 57. Page No. 33 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Ritusandhi- (inter-seasonal period) :- Rea: Hecate Trae RAIN HAA: | Ta at faftecasa: Sactat area HAT 1 tee fe Wa: SE AeA cArerefteree I rtvo: antyadi saptahau rtusandhiriti smrta: | tatra piirvo vidhistyajya: sevaniyo aparal kramiat || asatmyaja hi roga: syu: sahasa tyagasilanat || The seven days at the end and commencement of a season is known as Rtusandhi (inter seasonal period). During this period, the regimen of the preceding season should be discontinued gradually and that of the succeeding season should be gradually adopted; sudden discontinuance or sudden adoption gives rise to diseases caused by asatmya (non-habituation). 58-59 ‘2 Thus ends the chapter- named Ritucayra, the third of Sutrasthana of Astanga Hridaya samhita composed by Srimad Vagbhata, Son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Page No. 34 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 4: Roganutpadaniya Carrey eateefet Preventive Healthcare The fourth chapter of Astanga Hridaya is called as Roganutpadaniya Adhyaya — Preventive healthcare tips. it explains the method of adjusting the body to the natural signs so as to avoid toxic material accumulation and onset of disease process. Meaning of the chapter name: Roganutpadaneeya = Roga + Anutpadaneeya Roga means disease Utpadana means production. Anutpadana means prevention of production. So, Roga Anutpadaneeya means — prevention of onset of disease. This chapter deals with preventive healthcare. wercier ar Adharaneeya Vega — Natural urges that should not be suppressed Soe ACA AA Aaa CATE FeGTHTATA La SRATA COLT 1 One should not suppress these natural urges - Adhovata — flatus (fart) Vit — faeces Mutra — urine Kshavatu — sneeze Trut — thirst Kshudha — hunger Nidra — sleep Kasa — cough 9. | Shramashvasa — breathing on exertion 10. Jrumbha — Yawning 11. Ashru — tears, weeping 12. Chardi— vomiting 13. Retas — semen PADMWPYNS All these natural urges should not be suppressed by force. Page No. 35 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan stare Adhovata abrodha — adverse effects of suppressing flatus — AAA P ASHE CA TA EGCT: 2 By suppression of the urge of flatus (farting), on a continuous basis, one becomes prone to abdominal bloating, tumor, Udavarta — bloating, gaseous distension of abdomen Ruk — abdominal pain Klama — tiredness, exhaustion without doing anything blockage of flatus, constipation and difficulty in urination loss of vision and loss of digestive power diseases related to upper part of stomach and heart This is because — the Vata gets obstructed in intestine by avoiding farting. At intestines and rectum, natural movement of Vata is downward. But because of suppression of flatus, Vata moves in upward direction and causes all these problems. Most of the problems explained are due to Vata imbalance. gis We Bad effects of suppressing urge to defecate — Shakrut Nirodhaja Roga — wpa: Tustatease wider feet: sedary: wrrdf gcaeaterererey aaa eugicaes yatecea sree: Ea: 3-4 Pindikodveshta — twisting pain of calf muscles Pratishyaya — running nose Shiroruja — headache Urdhvavayu — upward movement of Vata, Parikarta — anal itching sensation. Hrudayasya Uparodhana — stiffening feeling in chest region Mukhena Vit pravrutti — foul breath, feces vomiting. Bad Effects due to Suppression of urination: apes teregd ow orat ter: Angabhanga — body pain, Ashmari— Urinary calculi Pain in penis and bladder region. Diseases that are mentioned in flatus and faeces may also occur in this condition. Page No. 36 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Treatment for suppression of flatus, feces and urine — aaluer aft 31eaga 3tamera Cae sitana a To treat the diseases arising from suppression of flatus, feces and urine, the following should be given. Varti — Rectal and urethral suppositories Abhyanga — Oil massage Avagaha — tub bath, sitz bath Svedana — sweating therapy, sudation therapy Bastikarma — rectal enema Annapaanam ca vidbhedhi — all food that help to induce purgation should be administered. Treatment of diseases due to suppression of urination urge — FBSy I Wel uv weed ered Fa & ENedet ohoifeach area AAT AlsrereaaaL HatisHAced AAA URC TA: 6 In diseases caused by suppression of urine, drinking of ghee before lunch is idea. Drinking ghee in the maximum dose at the end of digestion of meal of both the midday and the night is also advised. Such a process of drinking high doses of ghee is called as Avapidaka Sneha. Suppression of belching: saRearefa: ray feaeet saat: SMeAerHe eared eatacds AIA ¢ Suppression of belching may cause Aruchi — Anorexia, lack of interest in taking food Kampa — tremors. Vibandha — constipation Hrudayo Raso — stiffening sensation in chest region Adhmana — bloating, gaseous distension of abdomen Kasa — cough, cold Hidhma — hiccup The treatment for this is similar to treatment for suppression of hiccups. Page No. 37 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Suppression of sneezing: Suppression of sneezing may cause — Shiro Arti— headache Indriya Daurbalya — weakness of sense organs Manyasthamba — Neck stiffness Ardita — Facial palsy Treatment: Tere re ste aoa ratchet sper: vadacalfe rai treeacl a efrerate Teekshna Dhooma — powerful herbal smoking, Anjana — Collyrium Navana — Snuffing Arkavilokana — seeing Sun directly for a few seconds Massage, Oleation and sudation therapies are also mentioned as treatment. All these are done to induce sneezing and to regularize Vata movement. Suppression of thirst — aise ure aes arate aT BaaTET: ore ferarerel at effet: wat faferéa: vo Suppression of thirst causes Shosha — Emaciation Angasada — debility, weakness Badhirya — deafness Sammoha — loss of consciousness, delusion Bhrama — delusion Hrut Gada — cardiac disorder Treatment: aa afta: af fafeféa: vo All procedures that are cooling in nature — like cold water drinking, cold water bath etc is recommended. Page No. 38 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Suppression of hunger: HSAs HOPI Torey PIV Mor HHT: ATT: ve Angabhanga — bodyache, myalgia Aruchi — Anorexia, lack of interest in taking food Glani — debility Karshya — emaciation, weight loss Shoola — abdominal colic pain Bhrama — delusion Treatment: TAASA AY Rage Se Hed w alse Light meals, with oily substance (such as ghee), which is hot/warm in nature. Note: Fasting causes decrease in digestion power and increase in Vata. If you take a large meal after fasting for long, then it will further decrease digestion power. Hence a light meal is advised. Oily substance such as ghee soothes gastric mucosa. Hot/warm food helps to maintain Agni (digestion power). Suppression of sleep: fegrar ale aquifer sarees opfesrerr: SSTACLT AA Sve: Fac: Pargettfer Tez Suppression of sleep causes Moha — delusion Murdha Akshi Gourava — heaviness of head and eyes Alasya — laziness, lassitude Jrumbhika — yawning Angabhanga — bodyache, myalgia Treatment: da SSC: Facet: Falgetlfer TF Sleep and massage. Suppression of cough: PRAT Weel Acdie: CANA ETAT: 83 ater ear a, at ara araergent fate: Page No. 39 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan By suppressing cough, it further increases. It further may lead to Shvasa — Asthma, COPD, wheezing, breathing difficulty Aruchi — Anorexia, lack of interest in taking food Hrudamaya — cardiac disorder Shosha — Emaciation Hidhma — hiccup Treatment — #1 314 HAART fave: All treatment which relieves cough (Regular treatment to cough) should be given. Suppression of breathing on exertion: JPA Baty AeA: sTHVaATE lana ey Avoiding heavy breathing after heavy work may lead to Gulma — Abdominal tumor, bloating Hrudroga- Cardiac disorder Sammoha — loss of consciousness, delusion Treatment: fed fast aa aictaea faa: Vishrama — rest Vata balancing treatment. Suppression of yawning: RAM: aaa: TARA feTeATSIE Ae: &s The suppression of yawning produces similar symptoms to that of suppression of sneezing. Here, Vata balancing activities/treatment should be taken up. Suppression of tears CA MTA: AT CaCl Heal HAT: HA: ve Suppression of tears causes Peenasa — running nose, rhinitis Akshi Roga — eye disorders Hridrik — heart diseases associated with pain Manyasthamba — Neck stiffness Page No. 40 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Aruchi — Anorexia, lack of interest in taking food Bhrama — delusion Gulma — Abdominal tumor, bloating Treatment: sleep, alcohol and sweet talk with friends and family. Suppression of vomiting: faatntogts sieavguesaaasay: HRA ECoeaS MIATA TH: ko Suppression of vomiting causes Visarpa — Herpes, spreading skin disease Kotha — allergic skin rashes Kushta — skin diseases Akshi Roga — eye disorders Kandu — itching sensation Pandu — Anemia, intial stages of liver diseases Jvara — fever Kasa — cough, cold Shwasa — Asthma, COPD, wheezing, breathing difficulty Hrullasa — nausea — vomiting sensation ‘Vyanga — Pigmented patches on face Shvayathu — oedema, inflammation Treatment: TOGIYATAERT Bal Hera AGaaH: TARTA: BTRAT eect UT Taare 8¢ wancant dansasmet a ead Gandusha — gargling Dhumapana — herbal smoke Rooksha aahara Vamana — eating dry food and inducing vomiting Vyayama — exercise Asra Sruti— Blood letting (in case of skin diseases) Virechana — purgation type of Panchakarma treatment. Note: Suppression of vomiting causes Pitta imbalance. Hence most of the treatment above is targeted to balance or eliminate Pitta. Page No. 41 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Suppression of Semen ejaculation: UHeAMIT TEA GA LAMY SAT: 2S FCSAM MS MASAGEALAIVET: Suppression of ejaculation causes Sravana — oozing of semen Guhya Vedana — pain in groin Shvayathu — oedema, inflammation Jvara — fever Hrid Vyatha — cardiac pain, distress Mutrasanga — Obstruction to the flow of urine and difficulty Angabhanga — bodyache, myalgia Vruddhi — Hernia Ashma — stone formation Shandata — Impotency Treatment: AAEM AAT HATA 20 Tamrachuda — chicken, Sura — beer, alcohol Shali-— rice Basti abhyanga — massage to the lower abdomen Avagaha — immersion bath with oil Bastishuddhi — cleansing of urinary bladder with enema Ksheera — treatment with milk processed with herbs Priya Striyaha — copulation Whom should not be given treatment? Ferlort TAotel after fagaat denier Who have intense pain and thirst, those who are habituated to suppression of urges — because the Vata and other Doshas will frequently get vitiated due to undesired activity and treatment will not be successful. Ksheena — who are severely emaciated, Those who vomit faeces — condition has gone out of control Page No. 42 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Root cause for all diseases er: Bs 3 aed saterorenct: friese wert aa afaes A q cel wfc ez TATA HM WT: Yaa ATHPCA Hea TET Ysottat Hefoltereray 23 All diseases are caused due to Vegodeerana — initiation of urges forcefully Vegadhaarana — Suppression of naturally initiated urges. For those common diseases arising from these acts, specific treatments have been counted so far. By disturbing the nature, it is Vata that is mainly vitiated. Hence the symptoms arising from suppression of natural urges could be treatment with food and treatment which clear the passages of Vata and help in restoring Vata’s natural movement direction. emit aa: — Urges that should be suppressed — anacd Fear dane Vast wes ae a ater Svatqawarerenenden fardiraa: 28 The urges that should be suppressed forcefully are — Lobha — greed Irshya — envy Dvesha — hatredness Matsarya — jealous Raga — unlawful, excessive attraction Shodhana —Panchakarma — purification procedure — timing Waa T BM Het Ace weet via sexs aaard Pa: epiaateoc: One must exercise precaution to clear out Doshas and waste products at suitable times. Accumulation of such toxins could lead to their aggravation and subsequently even death may occur due to this. Effectiveness of Shodhana — (Panchakarma treatment) ar: aefacpeaied frat age weet: Fg Aelleret: eer at Aw yerema: The Doshas that are balanced out by Langhana (fasting etc) and Pachana (digestion promoting) therapies may sometime get re-aggravated soon. However, Doshas that have been eliminated out with Shodhna (Panchakarma) therapy will never get re-aggravated. Page No. 43 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Tam waa Hed vasa After proper Panchakarma procedure at suitable times, rejuvenation treatment (Rasayana therapy) should be taken up, with suitable tonics and aphrodisiacs. Treatment for those who undergo Panchakarma treatment and who feel tired: Tea TAATENGS TT HAT, anfersBecnaterae sara aie ee: eeuaranrssy wating rrarac: MIAMI deteorlat fer WEL SAT: Bruhmana Ahara — nourishing eatables such as Shashtika Shali-— rice that mature in 60 days Godhuma — wheat Mudga — green gram Mamsa — meat Ghrita — ghee Medicine with Hrudya (cardiac tonic) and Deepana (digestive, carminative) qualities should be mixed with food and taken. Abhyanga — oil massage Udvartana — powder massage Snana — herbal bath Niruha Basti —enema treatment Snehabasti — oil / ghee enema treatment All these help to restore health of the debilitated. aa & aKa wa Bia WeaH ehavifega snes aya eeaares: By these measures, one could gain health, happiness, good intelligence, clarity of vision, strong sense organs, intelligence, sexual vigour and longevity. We get WM: — Traumatic diseases / caused by external factors a qafavacatsraraasenie aera: WIeaVAaea Ft ENE Ter: Those disease produced by bhuta (evil spirits, bacteria, parasites, insects and such microbes), Page No. 44 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan visha (poisons) air (hurricane, cyclone), agni (fire, electricity, radiation etc) kshata (injury, wounds etc), bhanga (fracture of bones) etc., as also those due to raga (desire, lust), dvesa (hatred), bhaya (fear) etc. are all know as Agantu diseases arising from external causes) Sarvaroga samanya cikitsa- (general treatment for all diseases):- war: wae Afegaraera: Tale: AMAA AEA AEM TAA 32 sudafatea fea: ofegearerary sroreaeael feliesera yeh ye 33 sete water fafate: walker: AAPM Ate T Meas Fy Avoidance of improper activities of body, mind and speech by willful transgression of rules, Control of the senses, remembering previous experiences and acting rightly, good knowledge of the habitat, season and the self, adherence to rules of good conduct and rituals Peaceful procedures as mentioned in Atharva Veda, Worship of celestial powers — Grahashanti (astronomical palliative procedures) Staying away from Bhuta (evil spirits, microbes) Respective treatment followed as per the principles explained above, are the general guidelines to treat all types of diseases. Qtlet WAT — Time for Panchakarma treatment Qeaterd cease daed faery aeast 313rHTer uae areal ara wali Weel RIMea SHI 35 The accumulated Doshas arising from winter should be expelled during Vasanta (spring) That arising from Summer (Greeshma) should be expelled during Abhrakala — Varsha Ritu — rainy season. That arising from rainy season should be expelled during Ghnatyaya (Sharad — Autumn season) By this, people will not become victims of diseases born by the effect of the seasons. Page No. 45 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan are taa: — Secret of good health fact feorenfaenadt aterant feviearea: Gel Wa: AeA: TATaATcAaA Ta WT sacar: He , who indulges daily in healthy foods and activities, who discriminates the good and bad of everything and then acts wisely, who is not attached too much to the objects of the senses, who develops the habit of charity, of considering all as equal, of truthfulness, of pardoning and keeping company of good persons only, becomes free from all diseases. Thus ends the chapter called Roganutpadaniya, the fourth in Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya samhita of srimad Vagdhata son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Page No. 46 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 5 Drava Vigyaniya za fraeta Drinkables The 5th chapter of Sutrasthana is known as Dravadravya Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. It deals with types and health benefits of all the liquid foods. It details types and benefits of water, milks, dairy products, sugarcane juices, honey, oils, wines and urine. Toya varga —(group of waters) Gangambu - benefits of drinking rain water shact aot Fae ToaT Te watereTay, aq Hear AS elt oy aya ¢ WSMET TT AVE TYE AY HeGATe: feenfeccad aqat erareratart 2 Rain water is which has come into contact with Sunlight, Moon light and wind is Jeevaneeya — Enlivening, improves quality of life Tarpana — satiating Hrudya — good for heart Hladi— calming and soothing to the mind and stomach Buddhi praboodhanam — Stimulates intellect Tanu — thin Avyaktarasa — imperceptible taste Sheeta — cold Laghu (light to digest) Amrutopama — similar to nectar Whether rain water is good or bad depends on the season and place where it rains. Notes — The properties described above are of rain water collected in a clean vessel directly, a little while after the commencement of rain. It should be consumed within a few hours as it loses its properties. With the increasing industrialization and pollution, the rain water has lost its qualities nowadays. Hence, may not be good to consume. Test for quality: ReMGeenae Motes Watt Racy Only that rain water which makes the boiled rice kept in a clean silver plate neither too moist nor change its color is to considered as good for drinking. 2 2 Page No. 47 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Samudramdu (seawater qualities) :- HTM AAG, det Weed ANMeayste fae Seawater should not be used for drinking expect during Ashvayuja month. (September. October/autumn season). 3 Notes:- During Ashvayuja month there will be the appearance of Agastya nakshatra (the star Canopus) which is said to remove the poisonous properties of water and other things of the earth, hence permission to use other kinds of water for drinking during this month. Var CUA edt Fat Tt means oT aaorredhancaye At afaqeataedd ee shane Rain water, collected in clean vessel and which has not changed in color taste and odor, should be used for drinking always. In its absence, the water of the earth, which resembles rainwater in all its qualities, collected from clean vast place that has black or white soil, which is exposed to sunlight and breeze. Dushtajala — (contaminated water) at Rrecrga lar pronase yay BeqraanevcaaAgee Uet 7S sf v t hietct seqaeded eecareaterteaa: sada w afer wat oT aL x vs x g ‘ . Water which is dirty, mixed with mud, algae, weeds and leaves, which is not exposed to sunlight and wind, which is a mixture of old and fresh, which is thick, not easily digestible, frothy, containing worms, hot (by nature), causes tingling of teeth by being very cold, that rain water which is un-seasonal or though seasonal that of the first rain (before the appearance of Agastya Nakshatra, that contaminated with the webs, saliva, urine, faeces of spider etc., and such other poisonous materials, should not be used for drinking. 6-7 Nadijala -(river water benefits) uRuatafaem: efraraer arearaciea: Wan: Aca ae fawtlarecdat 3eae Water of the rivers which flow into the western ocean (Arabian sea), which are sweet and which have pure water (uncontaminated) is good for health, where as that flowing into eastern ocean is not ideal for consumption. 8 Page No. 48 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan serenade: Uedieant: eAarAea ga: Waa wa T FEET: paedraeecHror nn THEI The water of rivers arising from Himalaya and Malaya mountains, and which get churned up well by dashing against rocks are good for health, whereas the same water if gets stagnated (and gets contaminated) gives rise to worms (intestinal parasites), filariasis, diseases of the heart, throat and head. 9-10 WTA SaAfet, ASAT: SRAM TCTASH UT, HEAT: Fat: Prose, aera: UTA aa dlevaaritva:, SIG Ce ane Ci Gil Water of rivers of the Prachya (gauda), Avanti (malwa) Aparanta (konkana) countries causes hemorrhoids. Water of rivers arising from Mahendra mountains cause enlargement of the abdomen and filariasis; those arising from Sahya and Vindhya mountains causes leprosy (and other skin disease) anaemia and diseases of the head; of those arising from Pariyatra, mitigate the (aggravated) dosas, bestow strength and sexual vigour, the water of the sea causes vitiation of all the three dosas. 11-12. Notes:- Pracya or Gauda desa comprises of central Bengal and parts of Orissa Avanti or Malwa country was round about the modern city of Ujjain. Aparanta or konkana comprises of Goa, karwr and north kanara districts of Karnataka. Mahendra mountain is the northern part of the eastern gaths, (the whole range of hills extending from Orissa to the district of Madura was known by the western Ghats. Vindhyas are mountain ranges of central India. Prriyatra is the western part of the Vindhya mountains. FaqUIeRU STATS, SATS ATO: The water of kupa (deep well), tadaga (artificial pond) etc., should be considered to be similar (in qualities and properties) to those of the desert, marshy and mountains (respectively). 12 Jalapana varja- (avoiding of drinking water) arg WIAA aT FaevA oust cas: Toga irae arenes reais: Rd wmieaarasar aceaeat af orever: Water should not be consumed or consumed in very little quantity, by those suffering from poor digestive function, tumors of the abdomen, anaemia, enlargement of the abdomen, diarrhoea, haemorrhoids, diseases of the duodenum, dropsy. Excepting for Sharad (autumn) and Nidagha (summer) even healthy persons should drink less quantity of water in all other seasons 13-14 Page No. 49 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Jalapana phala- (effects of drinking water with respect to meals) TATTAP IT Te TACA AMAT: Drinking water in between meals — healthy habit Drinking water after meals — causes obesity Drinking water before meals — causes emaciation, weakness Sheetajala (cold water) Alt Hea TOM LCST CAA TAT, Tose ieararawear” feraeaie &4 Cold water relieves Madatyaya — alcoholic intoxication, Glani— exhaustion, Murcha — fainting, Chardi— vomiting, Shrama — debility (fatigue), Bhrama — dizziness, giddiness, Trushna — thirst, Ushna — heat (of the sun) burning sensation, Pittasra — bleeding conditions and Pitta dominant conditions and Visha — poison.15 Ushnajala-hot water drinking benefits det Weed HVS oEsoT aecreilereray ve eearearenieeeeAaET: Uetasay HATA ALARA SAT T MEAT 8 Hot water Deepana — stimulates hunger, Pachana — helps digestion, Kantya — good for the throat, Laghu — easily to digest, Basti shodhana — cleanses the urinary bladder, Relieves Hidhma — relives hiccup, Adhmana — flatulence, Anila — aggravation of Vata Shleshma — aggravation of Kapha It is ideal on the days of Panchakarma therapy Navajvara — fever of recent origin Kasa — cold, cough Page No. 50 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Ama — accumulation of undigested materials, Peenasa — rhinitis (running nose), Shwasa — dyspnoea and Parshvaruja — pain in the flanks. 16-17 sareaee ay a ce satay ecard fed as, cqita aratspd ¢¢ Water which is boiled and then cooled Anabhishyandi — does not increase moisture or stickiness in the body Laghu — light to digest Useful in Pitta conditions. Water which is kept overnight, is not ideal for consumption. It increases Tridosha. 18. Narikelodaka- (coconut water benefits):- aiRaan Farrer Fag, qe fea ay Pouccfetset Ate STEAM 88 Tender coconut water is Snigdha — unctuous, oily Swadu — sweet, Vrushya — aphrodisiac, Hima — coolant, Laghu — easy to digest Relieves Trushna — thirst, Pittanila hara — balances Pitta and Vata. Deepana — increases hunger and Bastishodhana — cleanses urinary bladder.19 aff ata at: During varsa (rainy season) rain water is best and river water least suitable for consumption. 19 a Page No. 51 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Ksheera varga —(group of milk and milk products) ae afta: Fargurante Raseatsres Urgathera, 20 aA aL FSS LoS a freer Wet: Fa: Generally milk is Svadupakarasa — sweet in taste and also at the end of digestion, Snigdha — unctuous, Ojovardhana — increases Ojus, Dhatuvardhana — nourishes and increases body tissues, Vata Pittahara — mitigates Vata and Pitta, Vrushya — aphrodisiac, Shleshmala — increases kapha Guru — heavy to digest Sheetala — coolant. 20-21 Goksheera —(cow milk benefits):- aaeiied ACT seat Caetat WA AA AAACTARA ATT CATT: steisat Fapes trated wane Cow’s milk Jeevaneeya — promotes long life, Rasayana — anti aging, rejuvenating Kshataksheena hita — good for those emaciated after chest injury Medhya — increases intelligence, Balya — strengthening Stanyakara — promotes breast milk production Sara — helps easy movement of the bowels Relieves Shramahara — exhaustion, Bhramahara — dizziness Mada — toxicity, Alakshmi - in-auspiciousness Shwasa — dyspnoea, Kasa — cough, Atitrut Kshudha — severe thirst and hunger, Jeernajvara — chronic fevers, Mutrakrichra — dysurea Raktapitta - bleeding diseases 21 1/2 Page No. 52 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Mahisha ksheera — (buffalo milk benefits) feat Heaitar aagear attra Arey fe | 23 Il Buffalo milk is good for people with very good digestion power, who suffer from Anidra — insomnia. It is a coolant. 23 Aja ksheera-(Goat milk benefits):- semequercaanat aefaraeret: FF et MTSATLATEN Fa aA ATA AST 8 Goat drinks less water and does a lot of walking. It eats pungent and bitter grass and vegetables that are light to digest. Hence goat milk also carries these qualities. Goat milk is useful in Shosha — emaciation Jvara — fever Shwasa — dyspnoea, asthma, chronic bronchial disorders Raktapitta — bleeding disorders of Pitta origin such as haemorrhoids, nasal bleeding Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery. 24 Ustra ksheera (camel milk benefits) — sugared aire oy MEA ATH HTAS PAM ATEL 29 Ushtra ksheera (milk of camel)- is Ishat ruksha — slightly dry ushna — hot Lavana — salty taste Deepana — increases digestion strength Laghu — easy to digest Vatakaphaan shastam — useful in Vata and Kapha Krumi-— relieves worm infestation Shopha — anti inflammatory Udara — useful in ascites Arshas — haemorrhoids. 25 Page No. 53 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Manusha ksheera — (breast milk benefits):- ATTY Tea eT ALATA HTT qeoreaitcratered: Breast milk is useful in Vata and Pitta imbalance disorders Asruk — blood vitiation disorder Abhighata — useful in injuries Akshirooga — it is used as eye drops to relieve eye infections and to relieve redness. It is used in Tarpana and Ashchottana types of eye treatments. It is also used as nasal drops. 26. Avika ksheera — (ewe’s milk):- SECA GTA AHA areeatiet fecarearatedta prey Eve’s milk is not good for heart, hot in nature, useful in Vata disorders, gives rise to hiccup, respiratory conditions. It increases Pitta and Kapha. 26 2 Hastiksheera (Elephant milk benefits) - @fcea: aga it is strengthening in nature. Ekashapha ksheera- (milk of single hoofed animals):- meq cde ay MAA ARTA SAHA Milk of single hoofed animals (like horse, donkey, etc) is very hot (in potency), useful in vata disorders, is slightly sour and salt and causes lassitude (laziness). Uncooked milk is vat sftsaieg aera, aca Yaa Hea 2 sTaqertrat afeeld, aR ATTA Abhisyandi (causes excess secretion in the tissue pores, causing their blockage) Guru — heavy to digest Amakara — causes Ama and indigestion Yuktya shrutam amrutopamam -— if it is properly boiled, it is similar to nectar. Otherwise, it is poison. Dharoshna — Milk drawn from udder (nipple) direct in to mouth is similar to nectar. (Provided cow is perfectly healthy without any infection) Page No. 54 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Dadhi (curds benefits/soured milk/coagulated milk) FEATS TS TBC SI aaa 2 AE: Upraelvereaicrasereip Day eda efit fayrsdy 30 Gerd Fae a, wat T Teva Aare stat THAT AA A 38 AACR arate Tear a Deraah ait feet Ul AewAeae 32 FATA AA ATH OS MSTA TAL Curd has Amla rasa — sour taste Amla paka — undergoes sour taste conversion after digestion Grahi - absorbent, useful in diarrhoea, Guru — heavy to digest Ushna — hot in nature Vatajit — balances Vata Increases Meda (fat), Shukra (semen), Bala (strength), Kapha, Raktapitta (bleeding disorders), Agni (digestion strength) and shotha (inflammation). Rochishnu — increases taste Curd Useful in aruchau — useful in anorexia Vishamajwara — chronic, recurrent fever Peenasa — rhinitis Mutrakruchra — dysuria Grahani— malabsorption syndrome Rules for curds consumption: Curd should not be eaten at nights, not made hot, Curd should not be taken along with green gram soup It should not be taken along with honey, ghee, sugar and Amla. It should not be taken daily. If used daily, it may cause / worsen fever, bleeding disorders, skin diseases, anemia and dizziness. 29-32 Takra —(Fat-less butter milk):- as AQ HATES Ge Haldia 33 IMPERIUM AIT TAT CTS aT: CAST AT AANA AA TAL 3¥ Page No. 55 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Takra (butter milk) - churned curds Laghu — easy to digest Kashaya, amla — sour, astringent, Deepana — improves digestion strength Kaphavatjit — balances Kapha and Vata Useful in Shopha — inflammatory conditions Udara — ascites Arsha — hemorrhoids Grahani — malabsorption syndrome Mutradosha, Mutragraha — urine infection, dysuria Aruchi — anorexia Pleeha — splenomegaly Gulma — abdominal distention Ghritavyapat — in indigestion caused by excess consumption of ghee Gara visha — chronic intoxication and Pandu — anemia Mastu — Supernatent liquid of curds (whey/watery part of curds) :- AedeAe AL ala: eet faveratsr AT | Mastu is similar to buttermilk. It is Sara — promotes movement of fluids inside body channels Srotashodhi — cleanses body channels Vishtambhajit — relieves constipation Laghu — easy to digest. Navanita (Butter):- aactict ad Gee efict avtacniterael 35 SSMS TATA erAT ATA fe TRAST ainted ¢ asaie tratcaenrrisrd 3& Fresh Navanita (butter) is Vrushya — aphrodisiac, Sheeta — coolant Varna, bala, agnikrut — improves skin complexion, strength and digestion strength. Sangrahi — abosrbent, useful in diarrhoea Vatapittasruk jit — balances Vata, Pitta and detoxifies blood Useful in Kshaya — chronic respiratory disorders leading to emaciation Arsha — hemorrhoids Ardita vata — paralysis Kasa — cough Page No. 56 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The butter made directly from milk is Sangrahi — absorbent, useful in diarrhoea Raktapittajit — useful in bleeding disorders Akshirogajit — useful in eye diseases. 35-36. Ghrita — (ghee/clarified butter):- aed Creqietattarsany: Usraeysy TWAGEIM Ae CA PAANTTATT Ble aT ereTOTT IEA eer Fer cae, TAM CAAA MTHS 3¢ agleleqH ret Tae: Ete TT weuas fareraria HareepA 38 Ghee is ideal for improving intelligence; memory, ingenuity, digestion strength, long life, semen (sexual vigour), and eye sight. Ghee is good for children, the aged, those who desire more children, tenderness of the body, and pleasant voice, for those suffering from emaciation as a result of injury to chest (lungs), Parisarpa (herpes), injury from weapons, and fire, disorders of Vata and Pitta origin, poison, insanity, inauspicious activity (witchcraft, etc.) and fevers; Of all the fatty materials, ghee is the best. It is coolant, best for retaining of youth; capable of giving a thousand good effects by a thousand kinds of processing. 37-39. Purana ghrita — Old ghee ACTRARACSIR: HUe a fersarey QUOT SAA cael TeAVMTERITOT yo Purana Ghrita (old ghee) is used in the treatment of Mada — intoxication, Apasmara — epilepsy, Murcha — fainting, Shira, karna, akshi yoni roga — diseases of the head, ear, eye and vagina; Old ghee cleanses and heals wounds. 40. Milk preparations, fatty dairy products: dem: Prorettysep rare: apfeignar fasciFapealren: ve Kilata, Piyusa, Kurcika, Morana, etc. are strengthening, increase the semen, sleep and Kapha, cause constipation, heavy to digest, and aggravate the Doshas. 41. Page No. 57 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Notes - Kilata is the solid portion obtained after heating curds or buttermilk, Piyusa is the milk of cow which has just given birth to a calf, upto a period of about three days or till the milk becomes thin; Kurcika is the solid portion obtained after heating buttermilk while Morana (or Morata) is the sour, thin liquid portion. wed ata 385 felirad q aifeaesre I Milk and ghee obtained from cows milk are best and those obtained from ewe’s milk, the least. 41%. Iksu Varga — (group of sugarcane juice and its products) Iksurasa Guna — (properties of sugarcane juice) :- gait: OY de: Rarsell Geur: HHH AHd ve ga: effet sraitedet: Targurenca Ta: Juice of sugar cane is Sara (laxative), Guru — heavy to digestion Snigdha — unctuous Brihmana — nutritive, improves weight Kaphakrut — increases Kapha Mutrakrut — increases urine volume Vrushya — aphrodisiac Sheeta — coolant Asrapittaghna — useful in bleeding disorders Swadupaka rasa — sweet. 42. @ 3 wean, aeathiSa: ereheraa: Fase aT Pe Soe AASANTL feiracaret fayear a faci are ater: faare aefaseestt carat The tip of shoots of sugarcane has salt taste. Ifthe roots, shoots and worm infested parts of the cane is crushed together, the juice gets mixed with dirty material. It leads to burning sensation, indigestion and constipation. 43-44. aa loge: The Poundraka variety of cane is best in view of its coolant, effect, thinness and more sweetness of its juice; next to it is the Vamsika variety. 45. Page No. 58 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan MATTHASARAT AGATE: HAT, FANT: THIMT Bloor: PeafFaafaanieat: Next are the Sataparvaka, Kantara, Naipala etc., in respective order, are slightly Alkaline and astringent in taste, hot in potency and cause burning sensation slightly. 46. Phanita — (half — cooked molasses, unrefined treacle) :- Phanita (half — cooked molasses) is heavy (hard to digest), Abhisyandi (increasing the secretions in the tissues pores and blocking them), causes mild increase of Tridosha and cleanses the urine (by increasing its quantity). Guda — (jaggery/molasses/treacle) :- aifaecsaanl ata: Ys Hares: vo Guda (jaggery, molasses), washed well (made white and purified)- Natishleshma kara — does not increase Kapha to a large extent Srushtamutrashakrut — increases volume of urine and faeces If it is not prepared properly, it causes intestinal worms, increases chances of Kapha disorder in marrow, blood, fat tissue and muscles. Fe: WIT: WALT , Aa: VewaTisetaapPeL YC Old jaggery is good for heart, and should be consumed. Freshly prepared jaggery increases Kapha and causes indigestion. 47-48. Matsyandikadi — (brown sugar etc.):- gear: afforeratgat tedftcctferter: ACIVSHAUSAA: HAT TVTAcAAT: ys Matsyandika (brown sugar), Khanda (sugar candy) and Sita (white crystalline sugar) in their succeeding order are better. They are aphrodisiac, good for the emaciated and the wounded, useful in bleeding diseases and aggravation of Vata. 49. Page No. 59 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Yasa Sarkara :- AEST FASTA STAT ATTA Yasa Sarkara (sugar prepared from Yavasaka plant) is similar in properties to sugar but is bitter- sweet and astringent in taste. 49’. AS ILEMCH ESATA: AAMT: All types of sugars are useful in burning sensation, thirst, vomiting, fainting and bleeding diseases. 50. wearer werd a away | Among the products of sugarcane juice, sugar is the best and Phanita (half cooked molasses) is the least. 50%. Madhu - (honey) :- wa Sie qevesatasigenratecdayd 4? Aeprop faced aT HRAMT AR aL TMAH MATT Tea AY 42 Madhu (honey) is Chakshushya — good for the eyes (vision), Chedi— breaks up hard masses, Trut — relieves thirst, Shelshmahara — balances Kapha Useful in Visha — toxicity Hidhma — hiccup Asrapitta — bleeding conditions Meha — diabetes, urinary tract diseases Kushta — skin diseases Krumi— worm infestation Chardi— vomiting Shwasa — dyspnoea, chronic respiratory diseases Kasa — cough, cold Atisara — diarrhoea Vrana shodhana — cleanses wounds Vrana sandhana, ropana — heals wound quickly Vatala — increases Vata Ruksha — dry Kashaya, Madhura — astringent and sweet Page No. 60 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Crystallized honey — Madhu Sarkara is similar to honey in properties. 51-52. SUTIN FT Yat aelfereieat ac ll 93 Ul Honey, kills, if used after heating it, and by those suffering from great heat, used during hot season, hot country or with hot foods. 53. Teodst free a Ayo a frat saserqHanedad aaeaAlietadd 5¥ schegart: But honey does not cause any harm when used warm for producing vomiting or for administration of Niruha (decoction enema) because it comes out of the body before it undergoes digestion. 54. Taila Varga — (group of oils and other fats) :- det tance aa Ae clevt carats 7 Tae HTS BRAT HHHeT T 4g PM FIAe Eola HEAT A wetted pitted UT TEEN Batista se Oils are generally similar to their source (oil seed). Sesame oil is the most important among all oils. Sesame oil is Tvak doshanut — cleanses and detoxifies skin Chakshushya — good for eyes Sukshma — pierces into deep tissues Ushna — hot, balances Kapha useful for both obese and emaciated people. Useful to relieve constipation and worm infestation. When it is processed with other herbs, it is very beneficial in various diseases. Oil of Eranda — (Castor oil benefits) :- afaadeoraes cof Fag AL TS SAC aP Hay ATHTAA Sb seeirel a wereaaisoqsanat wat evict fofeact faa, tedwstada cafa sc Page No. 61 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Castor oil is bitter, pungent and sweet in taste, Sara — promotes natural movement of body fluids (laxative), Guru — hard to digest, Useful in Vardhma - enlargement of the scrotum (hernia), Gulma — abdominal tumors, Anila kaphahara — diseases caused by Vata and Kapha, Udara — ascites Vishama jwara — intermittent fevers, pain and swellings of the waist, genitals, abdomen and back, is capable of penetrating deep, hot in potency and bad in smell. Oil of red variety of castor seeds is still more penetrating, hot in potency and sticky and has a bad smell. 57 - 58. Notes :- Castor oil is used for medicinal purpose to produce purgation to relieve pains and reduce swelling etc. it is an efficient Vatahara drug (mitigates the increased Vata) and so very useful in many diseases. Sarshapa Taila — (mustard oil benefits) : Het aes Aevt acpersrero Tea ay Reap Hroproreitarrstedisrdl 98 Sarsapa Taila — (mustard oil) is pungent, hot in potency, penetrating deep, mitigates (reduces) Kapha, semen and Anila (Vata), easy to digest, causes bleeding diseases, rashes on the skin, skin diseases, haemorrhoids, ulcers, and worms (bacteria etc). Aksha Taila — (oil of Vibhitaka) :- Het Tal, fet Hea aw caries | Aksa Taila — oil obtained from seeds of Vibhitaka is sweet, cold in potency good for the hair, hard to digest, mitigates Pitta and Vata. Nimbi Taila — (Neem oil) :- AGU frdat Ard PApronwwld il & Il Neem oil — is not very hot (slightly hot) in potency, bitter, anti microbial, useful in skin diseases and mitigates Kapha. 60. Page No. 62 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Uma-Kusumbha Taila — (linseed oil and safflower oil) :- 3a Paes uso caselynncdhe | Taila of Uma (linseed) and Kusumbha are hot in potency, produce diseases of the skin, aggravate Kapha and Pitta. Vasa-Majja-Medas-(muscle-fat, marrow and fat) :- Fa Asa T aeteat satcaayal ¢ aREepRaed o faqaeaAer 3 arfea Vasa (muscle-fat) and Majja (bone-marrow) and fat mitigate Vata, cause increase of strength, Pitta and Kapha and similar in properties with the meat of animals from which they are obtained. Madya Varga — (group of wines) :- are treat Hee cleviteor qfeegiteaay £2 TAG IAFARCHAFATARA ALL THIS ERRATA HEAT 63 awsefetar afafergeat fed Tears, Peed Kat YEA Aictfaeitereray ey AAATARL YA Get fava eae Madya (wines, all alcoholic beverages generally) in general, Deepana — stimulate digestion, Rochana — help taste, Teekshna — penetrate deep, Ushna — hot in potency, Tushti pushtida — give satisfaction and nourishment Sasvadu tikta katukam — slightly sweet, bitter and pungent in taste, Amlapaka rasa — sour at taste and at the end of digestion, Sara — laxative, Sakashaya — slightly astringent, Svara — confer good voice, Arogya — improves health, Pratibha — talent, Varna — colour and complexion; Laghu — easy to digest, Beneficial to those having loss of sleep or excess sleep for both lean and stout persons; is non- viscid, capable of entering through minute pores and cleansing them, mitigate Vata and Kapha, all these if used judiciously; but used otherwise, they act like poison. 62-641. Ie aelsaetet ad, sterarct sewer es OM AoA fatracragerae: Page No. 63 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan aa aVAS HOTHAL HAT aT T CE Fresh wine is hard to digest; increases of all the Doshas, whereas old ones decrease; Contra indication for wines: Wine should not be consumed hot. It should not be consumed by person undergoing Virechana (purgation) panchakarma therapy It should be avoided by hungry person Wines which are very strong or very weak, which are very clear (like water) or very turbid and those which are spoilt, should not be used for drinking. 65-66. Sura (beer) :- aeHerreitagtenved Treat aS: WU Hferorealt Al sr eaeAHAHH AT kv Sura is useful in abdominal tumors, enlargement of the abdomen, heamorrhoids, duodenal diseases, is lubricating, hard to digest, mitigates Vata, causes increase of fat, blood, milk, urine and Kapha. 67. Notes :- Sura is prepared by fermenting a mixture of water, flour of rice, jaggery (treacle) etc., somewhat like the beer of the present day. Vibhitaka Sura — cesT arevit cat eee fetid a ora ALATA HMC ATA ARTEL £C alfacdtaner vedt wear defarcht aT ger aesaraet HS a mea freqtad 6s Sura prepared from Vibhitaka is not very intoxicating, is easy to digest, good for health; not so harmful, (as other wines) in wounds, anaemia, and leprosy and other skin diseases. 69. Yava Sura :- faseieaeh aa aet war Prelser | Sura prepared from Yava — Barley — Hordeum vulgare (barley) causes constipation, is difficult to digest, non-unctous and aggravates all the three Doshas. 611. Page No. 64 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Arista — (fermented decoctions) :- wets BRE: weaeasoner: vo aevirargerary: eitnentstersa rey Bled Teapiaccie: PUTHCAAT: v8 Arista (fermented decoctions) possess properties of the materials from which it is prepared, and is more intoxicating of all alcoholic beverages; it is useful in disease of the duodenum, anaemia, skin diseases, haemorrhoids, dropsy, enlargement of the abdomen, fever, abdominal tumors, worms (intestinal parasites) and disorders of the spleen; is astringent, pungent and aggravates Vata. 70-71. Mardvika — (wine prepared from grapes) :- aredieh ae FET APO ALL ALL seattcanferet weg Agel: HiPeneTerey Mardvika (wine prepared from grapes) is scraping, good to the heart, not very hot in potentcy, sweet, Sara — promotes natural movement of body fluids (laxative), causes slight increase of Pitta and Anila (Vata), useful in anaemia, diabetes, hemorrhoids and worms (intestinal parasites). 72. Kharjura — (wine prepared from dates) :- FAIR GI Att TS is inferior in properties than grapes, aggravates Vata, and hard for digestion. 73. Sarkara — (wine prepared by using sugar) :- aR: BR: Tas EEA aay TE: | v3 I Is sweet smelling, sweet in taste, good for the heart, not very intoxicating and easy to digest. erage aret ats: awereréraat: | Gouda (prepared by using molasses/treacle) increases volume of urine, faeces and flatus, is nourishing and increasing hunger. 731. Page No. 65 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sidhu — (wine of sugarcane juice) :- arate: HY: Tse sHTA HTT Aq: amlareifedeat wearer ax: Sidhu (prepared from fermenting sugarcane juice) aggravates Vata and Pitta, decreases lubrication and diseases of Kapha, obesity, dropsy, enlargement of the abdomen and haemorrhoids; that prepared by cooking sugarcane juice is best. 74. Madhvasva — (wine prepared from honey) :- Scataaaedienn AetieraHarsd Il 6S Il Madhwasava (wine prepared from honey) breaks up hard masses (of Kapha etc), penetrates deep, useful in diabetes, chronic nasal catarrh and cough. 75. Sukta — (wine prepared from tubers) :- Tea etppleteel Yaa AeteaAAL aqersurcavreaneel Eau VAHL ALA ve arr RAEI ogee pee Sukta (wine prepared from roots and tubers) increases the moisture of blood, Pitta and Kapha, expels Vata in downward directions, very hot in potency, is penetrating, causes dryness, sour, good to the heart, increases taste (appetite), is Sara — promotes bowel movements (laxative), enhances hunger, is cold to touch, useful in anaemia, diseases of the eye and worms. 76. Sukta prepared by using jaggery, sugarcane, honey and grapes are easy to digest in their successive order. Asava (fermented infusion) :- Wsey Hey Areah act TY AAA Il ww Il Asava prepared by using tubers, roots, fruits etc, is similar to shukta. Mes UY Mead Heart Wee AE Il be Il Asava prepared by using Sandaki (balls of fried paddy mixed with spices, dried in sun and then deep fried in oil) and by other material (such as oil-cakes etc) which have turned sour by lapse of time are appetizers and easy to digest. Page No. 66 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Dhanyamla (prepared rice and such other grains) :- areaee sig Heviteor Aecaceustelrrry AAFAA GA Cet SEAT 68 MAAR EET AL ATH TEA wre ahkiad airwaves co pigatryraret: srogiarerrgor a maricaqhtacaradsed aa: Ga ce Dhanyamla (liquor prepared by fermenting the water in which rice and such other grains, pulses etc. have been slightly cooked or merely washed) is purgative, penetrating, hot in potency, aggravates Pitta, cold to touch, relieves fatigue and exhaustion, increases appetite and hunger, useful in pain of the urinary bladder, ideal for use as Asthapana (decoction enema), good to the heart, easy to digest, balances Vata and Kapha. Sauviraka and Tushodaka also possess similar properties, useful in worms, heart disease, abdominal tumor, haemorrhoids and anemia. These are prepared from dehusked barley and and barley-with-husk. 79-81. Notes :- Shukta — Fermented gruel, Dhanyamla, Sauviraka, Tushodaka etc. were in use since ancient times. But now a days beer, brandy etc. alcoholic beverages have replaced them. Mutra Varga (group of urine) :- aaa sronfeaiesreronedlee RIA, eco warclevieor aU HE C2 PRAHA eT VS fet oAeL FeHePaanearproiiha oeaT <3 Urine of cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, elephant, horse, camel and donkey — these aggravate Pitta, are non-unctous, penetrating deep, hot in potency, pungent with salt as its secondary taste and useful in worms, dropsy, abdominal enlargement, flatulence, colic, anemia, aggravation of Kapha and Vata, abdominal tumors, loss of taste, poisoning, leucoderma, skin diseases and piles, and are easy to digest. Thus ends the chapter — Dravadravya Vijnaniya, the fifth of Suthrasthana of Ashtang Hriday. Page No. 67 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 6 Annaswaroopa Heeeaed frstett Food Stuff The sixth chapter of Astanga Hridaya is called as Annaswaroopa Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. It deals with details of different food materials. The chapter covers corns, grains, legumes, pulses, prepared foods, non veg food, leafy vegetables, fruits, salts and medicinal herbs. Shuka Dhanya Varga — Group of corns with spikes — BY Wray at: Tat Agia WeHcareera: pete: Heda AY: eel GNh: HPYAWSH: 2 ase alearerear: Heat: efreteireanr: Taser AF Ue Mos: aT: 3 Types of rice — Rakta (red), mahan (big sized rice), kalama, turnaka, shakunahruta, saaramukha, deerghashuka (having long sharp spike at the ends), sugandhika (having good smell), rodhrashuka, pundra, pandu, pundarika, Pramoda, Gaura (white rice), Sariva, Kanchana (golden colored rice), mahisha, Shuka, Dushaka, Kusumandaka, Langala Lohavala, Kardama, Sheetabheeruka, Patanga, stapaneeya (bright red) — these varieties of rice are good for consumption. - 1-3 Qualities and health benefits of rice — which one is best? Fargureanten: Rage Gear TeTeTTTE: HIATT: TZAT aedt Agen fear: ¥ Svadu rasa — sweet taste Swadu paka — sweet taste conversion after digestion Snigdha — unctuous Vrushya — natural aphrodisiac Baddhalpavarchasaha — causes mild constipation, causes lesser volume of faeces Kashaya anurasa — mild astringent taste Pathya — suitable for daily consumption Laghu — light to digest Mutrala — diuretic, increases urine volume Hima — coolant Page No. 68 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan RNY EAT Tae OPAC GT Heke HaAAEH UA Ad: WS Red variety of rice is the best quality (Raktashali). It relieves thirst and balances all the three Doshas. Next best to it is Mahan (big sized rice) variety. Next to it is Kalama variety, and the chronology continues, as in Verse | — 3. UH BIT: UR STS TS Tea: FaGN ANE: TEAM: Te HAM: VaCATM: & PeHATIeT ya ya a fetieac: Yavaka, Haayana, Paamshu, Vashpa, Naishadha varieties of rice are Svadu — sweet, Ushna — hot in potency, Guru — hard to digest, Shleshmapittala — increases Kapha and Pitta Snigdha (unctuous, oily) Amlapaka — undergoes sour taste conversion after digestion Srushtamutrapureesha — increases bulk and volume of faeces and urine They are bad in their reverse order. Shashtika Shali — Paddy which matures in 60 days - feaset ane wy: Fargierervet: Teeny ea: & Seat aifey Avot akeanfaaika: Shashtika shali— the paddy which matures in 60 days is best among all paddy. It is Snigdha - unctuous, oily Grahi — absorbent, useful in mal-absorption syndrome and diarrhea Laghu (light to digest) Svadu — sweet Tridoshaghna — balances all the three Doshas Sthira — brings in stability Hima —coolant It is of two types — Gaura — white and Asita-gaura (blackish white). Ae: HAHA Praag: ¢ PFIPCUSHAMACAINTT APP: RATARS TATA: 8 weve: Peaeaea Tee: FTA: Page No. 69 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Next inferior to shashtika is mahavrihi, next to that is krishnavrihi and the others such as jatu mukha, kukkutandaka, lavaka, paravataka, sukara, varaka, uddalaka, ujvala, cina, sarada, dardura, gandhana and kuruvinda. 7 b- 10a FAIGFoaHATHT Heat aie: Trectaet ge: vo TETTASICAT, Ralsecda oe: The other types of rice are — sweet in taste, sour at the end of digestion, increases Pitta and are hard to digest. It increases volume of urine and faeces, increases body heat and causes imbalance of Tridosha. — 10-11 Truna dhanya Varga — group of grains produced by grass like plants — aenigdtraeaanranic SH TY ee Paes atpodad aplteded Kangu, Kodrava, Neevara, Shyamaka and other grains are cold in potency, easily digestible, increases Vata, Lekhana (scraping, scarificient) and balance Kapha and Pitta. — 11 WAM heds Masaseot ae: ¢2 ? See NEN: WT Tre Taf efray fesse: Of them, Priyangu helps in fracture healing, nutritive, nourishing and is hard to digest. Koradusha is grahi (absorbent), coolant and anti-poisonous. (Yava) Barley benefits wat: offal ae: Tang: AT facade Fa: 83 eTH LATTA S EAE HVS AMAT °¥ Yava (Barley) is Rooksha (dry) Sheeta — cold Guru (Heavy to digest) Svadu — Madhura (sweet) Sara — promotes bowel movements Vit-vata krut — it increases the bulk of faeces and causes flatus Vrushya — natural aphrodisiac Stairyakrut — increases body stability Useful in Mutrameda — urinary disorder Pitta — Kapha imbalance disorders. Page No. 70 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Peenasa — running nose, rhinitis Shwasa — Asthma, COPD, wheezing, breathing difficulty Kasa — cough, cold Urusthamba — thigh stiffness Kantaroga — diseases of throat Twakroga — skin diseases — 13 — 14 wet waledaa: watson erst za: Anuyava (a small sized barley) is inferior in qualities to that of Yava. Venuyava (seeds of bamboo) is non- unctuous and hot in potency. 15 Godhuma — Wheat benefits — ga: effet ae: Rearset sitaeit araftecer ¢s weurerant went ater: Taree AT: Tea aed ela HIATT AY: 6 Wheat is Vrushya — natural aphrodisiac Sheeta — cold Guru (Heavy to digest) Snigdha — unctuous, oily Jivaniya — enlivening Vatapittaha — balances Vata and Pitta Sandhanakari — heals fractures and wounds Madhura (sweet) Sthairyakrut — increases body stability Sara — promotes bowel movements Pathya — can be had on daily basis Nandimukhi variety of wheat is good for health. It is Sheeta — cold Kashaya (astringent) Madhura (sweet) And Laghu (light to digest) 16 sia eerereaact: Page No. 71 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shimbidhanya varga — (group of legumes and pulses):- Femme aac Resees faaetrp PMS Tale Asal Hah fEH AT ev Mudga (green gram) , adhaki (toor dal), masura(lentil) and other varieties belong to the group called shimbidhanya (those having pods/legumes). Vibandhakrut — They cause constipation, Kashaya, Swadu — astringent sweet in taste, Grahi — absorbent, Katu vipaka — pungent after digestion, Sheeta — cold in potency, Laghu — easily digestible, mitigate fat, kapha, asra (blood) and pitta, suited for use as external application and bathing the body parts etc. 17-18 a AY Ha Aaah HoTIe:, HoTAEca aA: °C WHAT Hfereraa Bal TEAPAAS: Among them, mudga (green gram) is best, it causes mild increase of chala (vata): kalaya (round pea) causes vata and dryness, produces more faeces and is hard to digest 18 Rajamasha (big sized black gram) increases Vata, it is dry, heavy to digest and increases bulk of faeces. Horse gram benefits — SOOM: Poca: Teh HFA: HLA TAL &8 PRAY: HHATALT Eafe edsal: WA Kulttha (horse gram) is Ushna — hot in potency, Amlapaka — sour at the end of digestion, cleanses semen, useful in urinary stones, Shwasa — Asthma, COPD, wheezing, breathing difficulty Peenasa — running nose, rhinitis Kasa — cough, cold Kapha — Vata diseases But it increases bleeding disorders and is not recommended in such conditions, like menorrhagia. 19 Page No. 72 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Nishpava (flat bean) fest aTATcARA TAAHAAA FS: 20 WY face eayHarHenstasag: Nishpava (flat bean) aggravates vata, pitta, bleeding disorders, it increases breast milk production and promotes urine formation. It is Guru (Heavy to digest) Sara — promotes bowel movements Vidahi — increases burning sensation It is not good for eyes and semen quality. It decreases Kapha, inflammation and is useful in poisoning. 20 Masha - Black gram benefits: AMS: FEatseit THVT AMAR: AT: 2 Teron stfetorel Fag: eswqe farce Black gram is Snigdha — unctuous, Balya — increases strength, increases kapha and Pitta Malakara — increases bulk of faeces, Sara — laxative, Guru — not easily digestible, Ushna — hot in potency, Vatahara — mitigate Vata, Madhura — sweet in taste, shukra vruddhikara, Virekakrut — increases semen and promotes ejaculation strength. 21 Welter AIGA PACA HTS To ACTA: Fruits of kakandola and atmagupta (Mucuna pruriens) are similar to black gram in qualities. 22 Sesame seed benefits: swurecaeal fear: Tat Heat gouleaot ae: Hous: He: TH ALM HerHwpAcdhed 2 Tila (sesamum) is Ushna — hot in potency , Tvachya — good for the skin, Sheetasparsha — cold on touch, Keshya — good for hairs, Page No. 73 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Balya — strengthening, Guru — hard to digest, Alpamutra — produces little quantity of urine, Katu paka — pungent at the end of digestion Medhakrut — increases intelligence, Agnikrut — increases digestive function, and increases kapha and pitta. 23 Seeds of uma (linseed) TREE: We, Aca Sol PAHS WwW Seeds of uma (linseed) is Snigdha unctuous, Madhura Tikta — sweet — bitter in taste, Ushna — hot in potency, increases kapha and pitta, hard to digest, not good for vision and semen, pungent at the end of digestion. Similar are the seeds of kusumbha. 24 AMS 314 Bdvaant, Gah: YHoy 7 Masa (black gram) in the group of simbija (legumes) and yavaka (small barley) in the group of sukaja (cereals) are inferior. ad aesaaated, Al CaCI tesa cer yee reqs aferasiisry Fresh grains (just harvested) are abhisyandi (causes excess exudation from tissue pores and block them by it), those old by one year are easily digestible. Those which grow quickly, those which are removed of their husk, those that are properly fried are also easy to digest. 25 gfe redeneaast: Thus ends the group of shimbi dhanyas (legumes). Page No. 74 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kritannna varga- (group of prepared foods) HY HAT | TeAeat TH: Austen Heqaea W ATTA 2 merge Racca Ast acetate: qerelietarseasea: Weel MAA WW aictargaeedel Beeyerate Tero Manda, peya, vilepi and odana are preparations of rice or other grains cooked in water. Manda - The thin fluid resembling water, drained out immediately after boiling is known as manda; Peya — slightly thicker to manda but still only liquid is peya; Vilepi-— the next stage with more of solid grain and less of fluid is called vilepi and Odana — the last stage which is solid without fluid portion is known as odana. Manda, peya, vilepi and odana are more easily digestible in their preceding order of enumeration. Manda ~ easiest to digest. Odana — is comparatively harder to digest. Manda — (thin fluid drained out) Manda is the best. It causes easy movement of faeces and flatus, relieves thirst and exhaustion, It nullifies residual doshas. Hence it is used as diet after Panchakarma, wherein all the Doshas are eliminated. Manda helps digestion, restores the normalcy of the tissues, causes softness of the channels, perspiration and kindles the digestive activity. 26-27 2 Fe TH ea tACAPAATSATIET 2 Fereeael gaa Gar Ararat Peya (more liquid, less solid) relieves hunger, thirst, exhaustion, debility, diseases of the abdomen and fevers, if it causes easy elimination of faeces, good for all, kindles appetite and helps digestion. 28 fac anfect gaan qeerresit ataeit fear ze Vilepi (less liquid more solid) withholds discharge of fluids from the body, good for the heart, relieves thirst, kindles appetite, ideal for all, especially for those suffering from ulcers, eye diseases, those who have been administered Panchakarma purification therapies, who are weak and who have been given fats for drinking as part of Snehana therapy (before Panchakarma). 29 aata: Wad: Racal Heaediear aleetl og: mea seeaose: faatict ae: eixarereties arfera: Page No. 75 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Odana (solid) prepared with grains which have been washed well, in which the entire water has evaporated and which is devoid of hot fumes is easy to digest; likewise that prepared along with addition of decoction of medicinal substances of hot potency or that prepared with fried grains are also easily digestible; the opposite of these that prepared with addition of milk, muttom etc., are hard to digest. Sia geafwararareanes: waatee In this manner, the effects of the grain, kind of processing, admixtures, quantity and other aspects should all be determined. 30-31 Manisa rasa (meat soup) ger: Hore Guaeaaqsar qorel Ta: Mansa rasa (meat soup) is Brihmana — nourishing Preenana — gives satisfaction, Vrushya — aphrodisiac, Chakshushya — good for the eye (vision) and Vranaha — heals ulcers and wounds. 32 Mudgasupa (soup of green gram) Alegre Ta: AYeaerHvoaRa oT, Mudgasupa (soup of green gram) is good for health, for those who have undergone Panchakarma purification threrapies and for those suffering from ulcers, diseases of the throat and eyes. 32 Kulattha Supa (horse gram soup) aero alert Tore rates, Kulattha Supa (horse gram soup) is Vatanulomi — initiates normal movement of Vata Useful in Gulma (abdominal tumor), tuni and pratituni (pains of the groin region) 33 Page No. 76 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Eatables prepared from Tila (sesamum) facfivarniacpia: esaerch fawcne wesc Eta aN TAT TG Eatables prepared from Tila (sesamum), Pinyaka (residue of sesamum after the oil is taken out), dried leafy vegetables, germinated grains, shandaki vataka (balls of fried rice dried in sun and then fried in oil) are not good for eyes, increase the doshas, cause debility and are hard to digest. 34 Hence, Ayurveda does not recommend germinated grains. Rasala — THe seu Gear fFase sear VfITey | Rasala — curds churned and added with pepper powder and sugar- it causes body weight increase, it is aphrodisiac, unctuous, improves strength and improves taste. Panaka (vegetable / fruit juice) MAG Je FAA Tetsh Wore TS 1351 favciFa Faet Fee AUscaoT Tad | Relieves exhaustion, hunger, thirst and fatigue, gives satisfaction. It is generally hard to digest, stays long in the stomach, is diuretic and good to the heart. Its properties depends on material from which it is prepared. 35 Laja (fried paddy) arsneqe ocd Agta: awiead: 1136 aritcderatar deat veal fear: | Laja is prepared by frying paddy. Relieves thirst, vomiting, diarrhea, diabetes, obesity, mitigates kapha, cough and pitta, increases appetite, easy to digest and cold in potency. 36 Gaal INal seat: HH faverarHiRer: 130 Prithuka (parboiled and flaked paddy) is hard to digest, strengthening increases kapha and causes constipation. Prithuka is prepared by boiling paddy for short while and pounding it with pestle and mortar. 37 Page No. 77 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan erat favefesrtt sam auvi ceeit ae: | Dhana (fried barely and other grains) stays long in the stomach causing indigestion, is dry, satisfying, scarifying, and hard to digest. Dhana is made by frying barely which is soaked in water and saktu is flour either raw or fried. Saktu (corn flour) WFAA TI: ETC AANATAAAUT 38 tafed Fea: Wetcaed Ca TAMT: aleniedRatet cfaet fererar a saree 39 a seca A afasiacd Tracers aT Tee Corn flour is easy to digest, relieves hunger, thirst, fatigue , eye diseases and wounds, is nutritious and taken as a drink gives strength immediately. Corn flour should not be eaten without drinking water in between, should not be consumed twice in a day Should not be had at night Should not be taken solely, without other kinds of foods. Should not be had after meals It should not be hard to chew and it should not had in excess quantity. 38-39 Many tasty eatables are prepared from the flour of rice and other cereals, horse gram, bengal gram and other legumes, with addition of spices, sour and fragrant substances, some of them are boiled in water, some are steamed, some are fried in oil etc, vegetables like onions, brinjals, ete. are also used in some preparations. These are usually consumed as side—dishes or snacks in between meals. However in view of their difficult digestibility, some warnings have been enumerated above. Favarent sora wait fasersth eFeqarr: ive Pinyaka produces giddiness, dryness indigestion and vitiates vision. Pinyaka is the residue of sesamum, groundnut and other oil seeds, after extracting the oil from it. aaant ae: Rarselt getvasathe: | AesMigaed Ia SAMA: | Ye I Vesavara is meat, cut into minute bits, added with spices like pepper, ginger etc, and roasted or fried. Vegetable vesavara is prepared with flour or pulses of various kinds, added with spices etc. Vesavara is hard to digest, is unctuous, increases strength and builds the body. Vesavara prepared from green gram and others is hard to digest and possess properties similar to the material from which it is prepared. 41 PHATH NMS Hog aS TT ATL, Varaeliereg irae mre Te eR eA Page No. 78 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Eatables cooked by steaming, baked on hot mud or iron pan, in a vessel kept over a stove, inside a hearth and baked by placing on burning coal directly are easy to digest in the successive order of their enumeration. This means, eatables prepared directly over coal is easier to digest than eatables cooked by steaming. 42 Sia Paeat Trae ast: Thus ends the groups of prepared foods. Manisa varga — (group of meats) eRvborpesararatrenot zerarar: UAIEANAGAAITCAT HIT: THAT: Mriga varga (deer etc) :- Harina (antelope, fawn) Kuranga (type of deer), Arksa (white footed antelope) Gokarna (Deer antelop), Mrigamatrika (Red coloured hare like deer), Shasha ( rabbit), Shambara (deer with branched horns), Charushka (gazelle) sarabha (eight footed animal) Etc. are known as Mriga 43. These are different kinds of deer, antelope and bucks. Some of them are having horns, some are hornless, all of them are herbivorous and live in dry regions especially shrubby forests. In olden days they were being hunted mainly for food. Viskira varga — group of birds which scratch ground with legs to pick food :- maar macRaAa APH TPA: HASAATIPCATHNP SAE: ada afcet da fafa: ware: Prat Trae Taher aaa aT: TU UNA STHALCTGATRA FATS: Lava (bustard quail), Vartika (bush quail), Vartira (rain quail), Raktavartma (red eyed owl), Kukkubha (wild cock), Kapinjala (black partridge), Upachakra (small greek pheasant), Chakora (greek pheasant), Kurubahava, Vartaka (button quail), Vartika( bush quail), Tittiri (grey partridge), krakara (black partridge), sikhi (peacock), tamracuda (domestic cock), bakara (small creane), gonarda (siberian crane), girivartika (mountain quail), Sharapada (a kind of sparrow), indrabha (hedge sparrow), varata (goose) etc. belong to the group known as viskira (birds which scratch the ground with their legs and picks up their food.) 44-45 Page No. 79 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pratuda- group of birds which peck the food and eat — srassitachel eee Sale AHA: Jivanijivaka (greek partridge ), datyuha (gallinule), bhrunagahwa (shrike), suka (parakeet), sarika (mynah), latva (wild sparrow), kokila (cuckoo), harita (grey peigon), kapota (wood peigon), Chataka (house sparrow) etc. belong to the group of pratuda (birds which peck the food and eat). 46 Bileshaya - group of creatures that live in burrows - Weer: HHalenigeataarear Teeter: Bheka (frog), godha (iguana lizard), Ahi, (snake), swavid (hedgehog) etc. are bileshaya (living in burrows). 47 Prasaha varga — living beings which catch food by teeth, tear and eat :- AANA Hea Haya ATA: nx < [4 ) aa AT AR Gch ATA TTA GATT: TEAST APTA PPA: earn ayer afl weer AsraterT: Go (cow), khara (ass, donkey), aswatara (mule),ustra (camel), ashwa (horse), dwipi (leopard), Simha (lion), Aruksha (dear), Vanara (monkey), marjala (cat), musaka (rat, mice), Vyaghra (tiger), Vrka (jackal), babhru (large brown mongoose tarksu (hyena), lopaka (fox, jambuka (jackal), syena (hawk), casa (blue joy), vantada (dog), vayasa (crow), sasaghni (golden eagle ), bhasa (bread vulture ), kurara (osprey), grdhra (vulture), uluka (owl), kulingaka (sparrow hawk), dhumika (owlet), madhuha (honey buzzard), these and other animals and birds belong to the group known as prasaha (which catch their food by the teeth, tear it and eat.) 48-49 Mahamriga — big animals — TARR: Usa TeV ABT: Varaha (boar), mahisa (buffalo), nyanku (dog deer), rohita (big deer), ruru (swamp deer), varana (elephant), srmara (Indian wild boar), chamara (yak), khadga (rhinoceros) and Gavaya (goyal ox) are known as mahamriga (animals of huge body). 50 Page No. 80 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Apchara varga —(aquatic birds) : - SAANAAIGFITHARUSACATAT: Tol HAH THC Hl SaIEaT SRRT: Hamsa (swan), sarasa (Indian crane), kadamba (grey legged goose), baka (heron), karandava (white breasted goose), palva (pelican), balaka (crane),utkrosa (mattard), chakrahva(ruddy Sheldrake), madgu (small cormorant), krouncha (pound heron) etc. are know as apcara (aquatic birds ).51 Matsya varga — group of fish - Aeear Uearansarpapesiaher: gfrasaiareqnermay deca: Uehara Ryans: TOA TATCAT AA CATETEC ET Ae asaith fara We a faces WS UT AYSAATAL ATTA Rohita (red fish), pathina (boal), kurma (tortoise), kumbhira (gavial, alligator), karkata (crab), sukti (pearl mussel), sankha (conch shell), urdu (otter), sambuka (comman snail), safari (large glistening fish), varmi candrika 9a kind of cat fish) culuki 9propoise, seahog ) pakra (crocodile), makara (crocodile), sisumara (dolphin), timingala (whale , shark), raji (snake fish), cilicima (red striped fish) and others belongs to group of matsya (fishes). Thus eight kinds of (source of ) mamsa (meat) are enumerated. 52-53 Meascadht cafAsairacaefatat Goat and sheep are not included in any particular group because of their mixed heredity and living in all types o lands. 54 FAH Tse Heat Bait Tayet Out of the eight groups mentioned above, the first three (Mriga, viskriya and pratuda) are also know as Jangala (Vata dominant); the last three (mahamriga, Jalacara and Matsya), are also called anupa (Kapha dominant); The middle two (bilesaya and prasaha) are known as sadharana ( tridosha balancing) 54 2 The region of land which has dry forests (shrubby) with less rainfall is Jangala, the region. This region is Vata dominant. Area with plenty of rainfall and water-logged is anupa (Kapha dominant), The region which has neither too much of dryness nor too much of moisture is Sadharana (temperature). The nature and qualities of the land are also seen in all the flora and fauna of the region. Page No. 81 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan aa gener: gear aeal sisson fear: 4511 ected aaa Beta HHT | Meat of the Jangala group are the best , they cause constipation, are cold (in potency), easily digestible, and good in sannipata with great increase of pitta and moderate increase of vata, mild increase of kapha following them. 55 aloe: ech: Teh are wail TA: ee: NSE Il The flesh of shasha (rabbit), enhances hunger, pungent after digestion, water absorbent and cold in potency 56 fafcaReasaty at Aenistsereyppd The flesh of the vartaka (button quail) and others are slightly hot in potency, hard to digest, unctuous and make the body stout. Tittiri (sparrow) is still better, makes for increase of intelligence, power of digestion, strength and semen, with-holds discharges of fluids from the body, improves the skin complexion, effectively mitigates sannipata with increase of vata. 57 arfacem: fret cea: staearaatesey The flesh of shikhi (peacock) is not very good generally but good for the ears (hearing), voice, ageing (to slow down ageing), and eyes (vision), 58 ceded HeHel FA: TACT VelsAcH Te: Fe HfeloHU: ECA: HART: ATI HT: Flesh of cock (wild fowl), is similar (to that of peacock), and is aphrodisiac; that of the domesticated fowl increase kapha and is hard to digest; flesh of krakara (black partridge) increases intelligence and digestion, is good for the heart (or the mind); similar is the flesh of upachakraka; that of kana kapota is hard to digest, slightly saity and increases all the doshas. 59 2 EH: LACHSA: EAT AAEM: Love: TLL Meat of cataka increases kapha, is unctuous, mitigates vata and best to increase semen. 60 aROUTSTT TAT aatearat Bacal FRUgpdld Fea ae: Hwee: Page No. 82 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Flesh of animals of the next succeeding group (bilesaya), are hard to digest, hot in potency, unctuous and sweet, increases urine and semen, strengthening, mitigates vata and increases kapha and pitta. 61. aia ABTTEAY HeaeMael: Yet: Flesh of the mahamrigas (big animals) is cold in potency generally; of them the flesh of carnivorous and prasaha animals have salt as secondary taste, pungent the end of digestion, increases the muscles of body, ideally suited for persons suffering from long standing haemorrhoids, duodenal diseases and consumption 62-62 1 Aja (goat’s meat) aifeeita Teer AA Hot HEI 163 I WRU Me HATTA FEU | Goat meat is not very cold in potency, hard to digest, fatty, does not aggravate the doshas, being identical with the doshas of the human body, it is anabhisyandi (does not cause increases of secretions in the tissue channels). It is nourishing, causes weight gain. 63. fantanal aaah Feet I AL Avi (meat of sheep) is opposite in nature with that of goat and causes weight gain. 64 PHI AT AGATA ATL Gomamsa (flesh of cow, bull, bullock) cures dry cough, exhaustion, excess hunger, intermittent fevers, chronic nasal catarrh, emaciation, and diseases caused by increase of vata independently. 65. Flesh of mahisa (buffalo) is hot, not easily digestible, produces sleep, strength and stoutness of the body. ACaERNTS: THEI VPaelsHaeIIE:: Flesh of varaha (pig) is similar to that of the buffalo, relieves fatigue, increases taste, semen and strength 66 AEST: OL Hwa: Paola eraryp Fish is general tends to increase kapha greatly chilichima fish tends to increase all the three dosas. Page No. 83 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan aranifeaaeor: a Fa aah aT: WAL Lava, rohita, godha and ena-are best in their respective groups. 67 A aegled Ye Cae T Het SIC | Ad He yet Aaa cata fateay ilecl Meat of animals which have been just killed, which are pure (uncontaminated) and of adult animals only should be used food; Meat of dead animals, of those which very emaciated, which are very fatty, and of those animals which are dead due to diseases, water (drowning) and poison should be rejected. 68 EAI, PISS Yat: ATT Re: THeaepors Hea: Teattea aay cen srarrrareraaanga faterteere, onary a Maa cReRA ALTER qworAggrHape ary Meat obtained from the parts above the umbilicus of male animals and from the parts below the umbilicus of female animals, that obtained from the pregnant animal are all hard to digest. Among the quadrupeds, the flesh of females is easily digestible but among the birds it is of the males. Flesh obtained from the head, neck, thighs, back, waist , forelegs, stomach and intestines are hard to digest in the reverse order of enumeration. The tissues of the animals such as blood and others are hard to digest in their successive order; testicles, penis, kidneys, liver and rectum are hard to digest than the flesh. 69-71. Thus ends the group of meat. In ancient India, hunting was very common both for the sake of food and as pastime. Among the hunted animals and birds belonging to different kinds and nature some were found suitable as food but some were not. It is difficult to correctly identify some of the animals, birds and fishes named herein, some of them might have become extinct even. Page No. 84 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shaka varga :- (group of leafy vegetables) HY Meat: Me TTSTRTSRSTA ATO CT Het, ay) 4 Relvet oy aig Arse ThA Afersoon siearpaqeaeay Welaia: WL wevaeittanea: adic J aed Patha (Cissampelos pareira), shati (Hedychium spicatum), susha, sunishanna, satinaja in general, mitigates all the three doshas, are easily digestible and grahi (absorbent); Sunishanna increases hunger and is aphrodisiac; Rajakshava is still better and cures duodenal diseases, haemorrhoids; vastuka breaks up the hard faceces. 72-73 Bled AIIAT HS FAT BOT Tae arparel GR Faar asso afserarreht Teva sietaeersatedieon arfeett ag: Kakamachi (Solanum nigrum) mitigates the three doshas, useful in skin diseases, is aphrodisiac, hot in potency, rejuvenator, causes easy movement of faeces, and is good for voice. Changeri (Oxalis corniculata) is sour taste, kindles digestion, good for duodenal diseases, haemorrhoids and for increased vata and kapha; hot in potency, withholds elimination of fluids and is easily digestible. 74 TATE HT: Farag traverse ferer aera: Hug aifanicandedHrae4: asporeantsteatarata aati ait poh ardél eet UHollcett alto haga eich Pantencanneaerey fred oe He IS Act HwHIcaista Patola, saptala, arista (neem leaves), sharngeshta (angaravalli/bharangi), Avalguja (Bakuchi), amruta (Tinospora), Vetra (shoot of vetra), Brhati (Solanum indicum), vasa (Adhatoda vasica), kutill, tilaparnika (badraka), mandukaparni (Gotu kola), Karkota, karavella (bitter gourd). Parpata, nadikalaya, gojihwa (godhumi); vartaka (brhati), vanatiktaka (vatsaka/kutaja), karira, kulaka (kupila), nandi (jaya),kucaila, sakuladani (mesasrngi), katilla (raktapunarnava), kebuka (kembuka),kosataka, and karkasa (kampilla) all these are cold in potency, bitter in taste, pungent at the end of digestion, with hold the movement of fluids, increase vatta and mitigate kapha and pitta. 75-78 eeu Uelet HiAe Hague vay | Page No. 85 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Patola is good for the heart (or the mind), useful in worms, sweet at the end of digestion and gives taste. cat det Ae acted Geciqqay The two Brihatis (Brihati and Kantakari) increases pitta, promote hunger, breaks the hard faeces. Vrusha (Vasa) cures vomiting, cough and especially so the haemorragic disease. ade THgh aed Hwa Karavella (bitter gourd) is bitter in taste, kindles digestion and mitigates kapha and pitta especially. Brinjal benefits: ada ae forcteot Hey aparafsrt | Aa Hsetstetet SAA Tea Scag NC Il Brinjal is pungent, bitter, hot in potency, sweet, mitigates kapha and vata, is slightly alkaline, kindles digestion improves taste and does not aggravate pitta 81 RACAL HITT FAIS, Taran Karira produces distention of the abdomen, is astringent, sweet and bitter in taste, alerdtded arnt eara sete ett Kosataki and avalguja break the hard faeces and kindle digestion. 82 coger feat wat: FaIQuratay oe: Haticdieweet: Asad aTatacahsrl Fearser efit Te Tag SEU HHL Tanduliya is cold in potency, dry, sweet in taste and also at the end of digestion and easily digestible, cures intoxication, pitta, poison and discovers of bold; Munjata mitigates vata and pitta, is unctuous, cold in potency, hard to digest, sweet, makes the body stout and increases semen. 83 at aR g Wes Aeealh TTeAa ea TASRMTALARASY: FY ASACMHH: Page No. 86 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Palankya is hard to digest, and laxative. Upodika (spinach) relieves intoxication; chanchu is similar to palankya and withholds elimination of fluids. 84 fear araftecdeet Hae Taregitcten shat geo avoar aah gear Tarra waqsar wales sfraec Fe fear Vidari mitigates vata and pitta, is diuretic, sweet in taste, and cold in potency, prolongs life (by giving strength), makes the body stout, good for the throat, hard to digest, aphrodisiac and rejuvenator. Jivanti is good for the eyes, mitigates all the dosas, is sweet in taste and cold in potency. 85-86 PAS AFI saTHH sa oeaosayey aar ayer taste = cha Rig favcrsaiaieg TAG TS Kusmanda (ash gourd), Tumba (alabu), Kalinga, karkaru, evaru, tindisa, trapusa, cinaka, cirbhata—all cause increase of kapha and vata, breaks the hard faeces, stays long without digestion inside the stomach, causes more secretion in the tissues, sweet in taste and at the end of digestion and not easily digestible. 87 Ash Gourd Benefits acto vat HeAVS aaah cc il Ash gourd is best among the creepers, mitigates vata and pitta cleanses the urinary bladder, and aphrodisiac. Trapusa causes more urination (diuretic). aes wart ane aifersstaterasteay aret Tecet ott faqurcrearat Heese ateiged I wat Peco atnatafsrd Veet det FMAM Hee oor] Tumba (alabu) is very dry (causes dryness), absorbent; kalinga, ervaru and cirbhita when tender mitigate pitta and are cold in potency, but when ripe are opposite in qualities, these which are overripe and separated from its attachment, will be alkaline in taste, increase pitta, mitigate kapha, and vata, improves taste and appetite, good for the heart, cures enlargement of the prostate, distention of abdomen and easily digestible. 89-90 Page No. 87 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan FUTAAM PHA Tae GHA AAAI HA ACYSMEHAA EAA, Mrinala (lotus stalk), bias (lotus root), saluki (lotus tuber), kumuda (utpala kanda), nandi, mashaka, keluta, srngataka, kaseruka, kranucadana and kalodya are dry (cause dryness). Water absorbent, cold in potency and hot easily digestible. 91-92 HAFTA PAH TH CHONG THA, Faleciecarhelvienrpechatyny shards prasHastraaya sen: Sear T AAT TUT ACATfey aTOTEL FalG, GAT AAA A AVAISAAL TS otrarorel Bsefavas wat fascee steifer Rar frsifsard Cigtet afaarsery Kalamba, Nalika — (kapotacarana), marsa, kutinjara, kutumbaka, cilli (vastuka), latvaka, lonika, karutaka, gavedhuka, jivanta, jhun jhu, edagaja, yavasaka (yavanisaka), suvarchala and aluka of different kinds, leaves of legumes used for soup and of laksmana are all sweet, slightly dry, salty, increases vata and kapha, not easily digestible cold in potency, help elimination of urine and faeces, stay long in the stomach for digestion; if cooked in steam, juice taken out and mixed with oils, they will not cause much aggravation of the dosas 93-95 ay val ¢ at fecha aedaaat Al Cilli, which has small leaves is similar (in property) with vastuka. 96 THRE Fare, Alta Hpatafsrt asisat arena a Bark ae ferry ater Haat Sieat axeltatnrfet cet Tarkari and varuna are sweet and slightly better and mitigate kapha and vata. The two kinds of varsabhu and kalasaka are slightly alkaline, pungent and bitter, improve digestion, break the hard faeces and cure artificial poisoning, dropsy, kapha and vata. 97 aoe: Hace aRaeasHU: ET: UAAISIST FA FEAT STTAATTBT: The tender sprouts of cirabilva increase appetite, mitigate kapha and vata and cause movement of bowels; sprouts of satavari are bitter, aphrodisiac and mitigate the three dosas 98. wat aerentted faaret ataitecter: Page No. 88 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vamsakarira (tender shoots of bamboo) causes dryness inside, heartburn and increase of vata and pitta. 99 Tey arraearca: cellent: acparatsrd, Pattura kindles digestion, is bitter, cures enlargement of spleen, haemorrhoids and mitigates kapha and vata. 99 pitnraranercaiel HAAG? SICA: Kasamarda cures disease caused by worms, cough and increase of kapha and moves the bowels. watsorret ahyret ae Ticceat FAL Kousumbha is dry, hot in potency, sour, hard to digest increase pitta and makes the bowels to move. Tet aes aefavays wdalypd Sarsapa (mustard) is not easily digestible, hot in potency, binds the faeces and urine and causes increase of all the dosas. Mulaka (radish), when tender and not having definite taste, is slightly alkaline and better, mitigates the dosas, easily digestible hot in potency, and cures abdominal tumours, cough, asthma, ulcers, disease of he eye and throat, horseness of voice, asthma, upward movement inside the abdomen (reverse peristalsis) and chronic nasal catarrh. 102-103. Radish benefits: Feat HAAS Fiat at AidraHA cea alset oe Aivor ferressict FT PHAR AT ALATA AU Te ATTA STCL SSRIS RIC GRIGR ILE HECHT: qarvaieg u Rasate cary arated AAA Ysa AIH HTH FT ato Radish that is tender, and not having definite tatste, is slightly alkaline and bitter, balances Doshas, easy to digest, hot in potency and cures abdominal tumors, cough, respiratory conditions, ulcers, diseases of eye and throat, hoarseness of voice, bloating, and rhinitis. Radish, big in size is hard to digest, pungent in taste and at the end of digestion, not in potency, increases all the three doshas, hard to digest and is abhishynadi (indigestion plus sticky to the gut). When cooked with fats it mitigates vata; the dried one causes increase of the dosha. 104. Page No. 89 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan HEU aTtaHtHel TAVsTey: Tcaatha: Pindalu is pungent, hot in potency, mitigates vata and kapha but increase pitta. 105 DOSS DSA CS D pPrssorsresimaie aie eee faarig Fe wat Fea cloeNraAy cayppgectant atelcrernt ay Kuthera, sigru (drum stick), surasa, sumuka, asuri, bhutrna, phanijjia, arjaka, jambira, etc. when green are water absorbent, cause burning sensation during digestion, pungent, cause dryness, hot in potency, good for the heart (or the mind), kindles hunger and taste, destroy vision, semen and worms (intestinal parasites), penetrates deep, cause slight increase of the dosas and are easily digestible 106-107. Holy basil benefits ietan are fay vary wiedea feereeer | RE: TST amfeaaarey aH 180 Surasa (Tulasi — Holy Basil) cures hiccup, cough, poison, asthma, pain in the flanks and bad breath. Sumukha does not cause much burning sensation, cures artifial (homicidal) poison and dropsy. 107 sifgan TaraaeRT Fao at a Aeapa Ardrika (coriander) is bitter and sweet in taste, diuretic and does not increase pitta. Garlic benefits: AAT aVrcEVIST: PETAL: AT: 808 Fem: Heat qeqea: Paselt Treere raat: AS UMAHEIoM CFA CAIGIT: 80 PHoaproseanelele apie teroael BcAeaAaT HAT Sled TAMAS ke Lashuna (garlic) is highly penetrating (deep into the tissues), hot in potency, pungent in taste, and at the end of digestion, makes the bowles to move, good for the heart (or the mind), and hairs; hard to digest, aphrodisiac, unctuous, improves taste and digestion, helps union of features, gives strength, greatly vitiates the blood and pitta, cures leucoderma, skin diseases, abdominal Page No. 90 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan tumours, heamorrhoids, diabetes, worms, diseases caused by kapha and vata, hiccup, chronic nasal catarrh , asthma and cough. It is a rejuvenator of the body.109-111 TAMUSEAM CTA: VAAN afar: Palandu (onion) is inferior in the above qualities, increases of pitta. 111 4 HAA WA: Cae syagdt aa ect assent aig Tica ether A: Grinjanaka (carrot) is best suitable to persons suffering from haemorrhoids of kapha Vata origin, for fomenting (the pile masses) and eating; it is penetrating, water absorbent and not suitable to those who have pitta predominance. 112 dros: Boy See: aepealy Fareed ore: farrsrastat yea: spreaecataalsa: Surana (Yam) kindles digestion, improves taste, mitigates kapha is non-unctous, easily digestible and especially good for haemorrhoids; bhukanda causes increase of all the dosas to a great extent .113 TI DT bel ale Het T SA HAT Te My starch ais raat WA sia gepast: Leaves, flowers, fruits (unripe), tubular leaves and tubers are heavy (not easily digestible in their successive order; jivanti is the best and sarshapa (mustard) is the worst among the leafy vegetables. 114. Thus ends the group of vegetables. Notes:- different kinds of vegetables have been described in these verses, some of them are recognizable now while some others are not, some of them were in use in olden days but not so now-a-days, many are available only in forests and fields while some others are cultivated. Page No. 91 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Phala vrga- (group of fruits):- Grapes benefits: Hy worat: Sle thellcataT GSAT AaySaT qseratae 88g TSIGUIRLET PEATE WHIT fear ae: forgrca ere Mea ealraeacaHeIeaaATeT 8 PE SOTPRAT ARATE aT AAT ATL Draksa (grapes) is best among fruits, is aphrodisiac, good for the eyes, helps elimination of urine and faeces, sweet in taste and the end of digestion, unctous, slightly astringent, cold potency, hard to digest, cures diseases of vata, pitta and rakta; better taste in the mouth, intoxication, thirst, cough, fever, respiratory conditions, hoarseness, injury to the lungs and chronic respiratory diseases. 115-116 4 Dadima — (Pomegranate) searaiccssates Aralstel Fag AISA 880 PATA ATO Fe ATH ua goa oe feaset ane waar ara vec It mitigates the greatly increased pitta in particular and the other doss also and is sweet; the sour variety is also not going to increase pitta, not very hot in potency and mitigates vata and kapha. All varieties of Pomegranate are good to the hear, easily digestible unctuous, without elimination of fluids, stimulate appetite and digestion. 117-118 FATTASRIATAT RATE, N 4 STAT TAT AAT AA STA Pa SHT AH oT LAAT AHI ATL Sea ate T set ae effete AeaTAAARL Tra ea aaa Tage Reiser facies awyppd Mocha (plantain), kharjura (dates) panasa (jack fruits) narikela (cocoanut ) parusaka amrataka , tala, kasmarya, rajadana, madhuka, badara, ankola, phalgu, slesmataka, vatama, abhisuka, aksoda, mukulaka, nikocaka, urumanam, and priyala make the body stout, not easily digestible cold in potency, relive burning sensation , injury to the lungs, consumption, bleeding conditions, sweet in taste and also at the end of digestion, unctous, stay long in the stomach without digestion, increase kapha and semen. 119-121 4 Page No. 92 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan chet J Peco atot at Hest ea wpersiddetedt Hea Akal TAA Fruit of Tala — Borassus flabellifera increases pitta, moves the bowels. Fruits of kasmarya is cold in potency, relives the obstruction of faeces and urine, good for the hairs, increases intelligence and is a rejuvenator. 122 AAAI MAS Ff awliccat A Vaataama etc. are hot in potency increase kapha and pitta, are axative. 123. We aidet Resear qf ares areasot ANY qva: Tccferetg: Priyala (Buchanania lanzan) mitigates vata effectively, is unctous, cold in potency; its marrow is sweet, aphrodisiac, mitigates pitta and vata, Reso Weise: wasted A: Kola majja (fleshy part of the kola) is similar (in properties with priyala majja ) relieves thirst, vomiting and cough. 124. Tad Hee fed alse yaa Bilva phala (bael fruit) when ripe is hard to digest, aggravates the doshas and causes flatus; unripe fruit kindles digestion, mitigates vata and kapha; both are water absorbant. 125 awa Huse alse, arvana J Amakapittha (unripe Kapittha) is bad to the throat, and increases the three doshas. Ripe fruit mitigates the dosas, relives hiccup ad vomiting, both are water absorbent and antipoisonus .126 oMeHea Te Taseiear eilctel aerator asaie Faerie Hwpitedtst Jambava (Jamun fruit) is not easily digestible, stays long inside the stomach, cold in potency, causes aggravation of vata especially, absorbs moisture from urine and faeces, bad for throat and mitigates kapha and pitta 127 aacarapesie, Teen tedpd, Ware aratsrcssa Farcaret HHH Page No. 93 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Bala amra (tender unripe mango) increases Vata, Rakta (blood) and pitta; when its seed is fully formed, it increases Kapha and Pitta; when it is ripe it is not easily digestible, mitigates vata, increases kapha and semen. 128 Fart Wis VAT aTAIAL AT Vrksamla (Garcinia fruits) is absorbent, dry, hot in potency, mitigates vata and kapha and easily digestible 129. SAT TBST Heleat HAF Samya (fruit of sami) is not easily digestible, hot in potency, destroys the hairs and causes dryness. Wet a react 33 apart Ae coer: plese aieatd tag aete ae ars, Pilu increases pitta, mitigates kapha and vata, is purgative, cures diseases of the spleen, haemorrhoids, worms, abdominal tumors; that variety of pilu which has bitter- sweet taste is not very hot in potency and mitigates all three dosas 130 catrtecdncal Sasa ALAS aes Geo AAT Ate areca TE OL AHL PALATE LATA TTL BETAS Perea VASA ae T HTT aera: yon Heated FT ae The skin of matulunga (bigger variety of lemon) fruit is better, pungent and unctous, mitigates vata; its fleshy part makes the body stout, is sweet in taste, mitigates vata and pitta and not easily digestible its tendril is easily digestible cures cough, asthma, hiccup, alchoholic intoxication dryness of the mouth, disorders of vata and kapha, constipation, vomiting, loss of taste, abdominal tumor, enlargement of the abdomen, haemorrhoids, colic and dyspepsia 131-133 AeaAApea AAAS Tale, eitctorey age ACT HHA WA Bhallataka (marking nut) The outer rind and fleshy part of bhallataka fruit makes the body stout, sweet in taste, cold in potency; its seed is just like fire in properties, increases intelligence and effectively mitigates kapha and vata. 134 Facer ear a afar welad ae weaacateat MAA Page No. 94 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Palevata fruit of sweet taste is cold in potency, while that of sour taste is hot, both are hard to digest, improve taste and cure diseases due to excess digestive activity. 134 4 wet AMARA aD T OFFAL SAT UA A PSOTST RATT AAL Aruka fruit improve taste and is sweet; ripe under goes digestion quickly, not very hot in potency, sometimes hard to digest and increases the dosas 135. aeTIeT UpAKS Pecan Draksa (grapes) and parusaka and karamardaka, in their green state are sour, increase pitta and kapha, hard to digest, hot in potency, mitigate vata and laxative. 136 Wad Gras Ade AaeosHy afacdart Ted Usa a RACHA Kola, karkandhu, lakuca, amrataka, aruka, airavata, dantasatha, satuda, mrigalindika- all are sour and do not aggravate pitta greatly; so also, karamardaka fruit ripended and dried does not cause great increase of pitta 9causes mild increase). 137- 138 aut Seat asnarccarrtara: wer oranraaesie Afease thar: Fruits of amlika and kola improve digestion, cause purgation, cures thirst, fatigue, exhaustion; are easily digestible and mitigates kapha and vata. 139 waATAA TH ops Taare sfa wera: Lakuca phala is least among all the fruits and increases all the above the dosas. Thus ends the group of fruits. Page No. 95 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Varjya (qualities of food articles that are worth rejecting):- eareretworgarrearerrren reg het THT To Aare aTHeATAaH HTT aadrt sivtaar 3ifa a aed Aacan wh wartennaay FRSA Aeeah Uewt ArH grr waa aur aT faeaatsraat Grains which have been spoiled by forest, heavy breeze, hot sunlight, polluted air , and saliva of snake and other reptiles; which are infested with worms, which have remained under water for long time, not grown in the field meant for it (in fields meant for other kinds of grain) , which are unseasonal, mixed with other grains, and which have lost their properties having become very old- should be rejected. Similarly also with the vegetables, the dishes prepared from them without addition of material 9oil or ghree), which are very hard even after cooking, should be avoided. Tender vegetables which have not developed their normal taste and which have become dry should not be used except amabilwa (unripe bael fruit) Ausadha varga (group of medicinal subsances/herbs) Salts: selva ast: favgieg cavl ad YEH Beat Ag evs Aceat TTT HevSoT Weed HHA All types of salts are vishyandi (produce more secretions in the tissues) suksma (enter into minute pores) help soft/easy movement of faeces, mitigate vata, help digestion, are penetrating , aggravate kapha and pitta. 143 Among them, dud at aeag Ie ges Palvag eye Ae OT TM: VLAATa TEA TACT TT saindhava salt (rock salt) is slightly sweet, aphrodisiac, good for the heart (or mind), mitigates all the three doshas, easily digestible not hot in potency, good for health, does not cause burning digestion and kindles digestion 144 Page No. 96 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan ae lade Fes PareeyeaNaM eee 8ys aguich faaetrest cetst raya Sauvarcala(sochal salt) is easily digestible good for the heart (or mind) , possesses good smell, purifies belching, pungent at the end of digestion , relives constipation, kindles digestion and gives taste. 145 Seq: pba eet TASH eye Faaeenene laser are[orai aon erty Bida salt produces both upward and downward movement of kapha and vata, kindles digestion, cures constipation, flatulence, obstruction, of flatus, colic and heaviness (of the abdomen). 146 fare Fag AS WS eoreat feather] Samudra (common salt) is sweet at the end of digestion, not easily digestible and aggravates kapha. 147. afarcrangaany cdevracnie alfear Aubdhida is slightly bitter, pungent and alkaline in taste, penetrates deep and increases the secretions. pot Sladen wavt areerafstar: Krisna lavana (black salt) has properties similar to souvarcala except the smell. 148 ta oy Romaka is easily digestible; Ue Aa Velvet AS Pamsuttha is slightly alkaline, aggravates kapha and not easilt digestible. warrant wat gq Arraie wats Whenever lavanas (salt) are to be used (for medicinal recipes) they should be prepared commencing with saindhava. ere ACUI S CAG TAG To ATL RAT: HHH WHAeAAYHaT: Page No. 97 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Yavakshara - (Kshara prepared from barley) mitigates abdominal tumors, diseases of the heart, duodenal disease, anaemia, splenic disorders, distension of the abdomen, diseases of the throat, asthma, haemorrhoids and cough arising from kapha. 150 Kshara - a: waa aH clever: pfeisreore: | Pica GIT: THT Som seat ASNT: 11¢98 Ul HUA: SEMA Ysrtst: HerTeyITy | All ksharas are very Teekshna — penetrating ; ushna — very hot in potency, krumijit — destroy worms Laghu — easily digestible Pitta Asruk dushana — vitiate pitta and blood Paki — helps in digestion, causes healing of wounds Chedya - help break up hard masses, ahrudya not good for the heart, punctures the tissues; being pungent and salty in taste are not good to semen, ojas (essence of the tissues ), hairs and eye (vision) 151 eS] Taos eee Tet IAT ILS HOUALE Sea Me Wet AT | Hingu (asa foetida) mitigates vata, kapha, cues distension of the abdomen and colic, aggravates pitta, pungent in taste and at the end of digestion, enhances taste, hunger, digestion and is easily digestible. 152. Haritaki - PMA ART We FAT fara AY: 843 aioe oraeit Acar aaa: Earceit wT seurdrat ET HCA Talieguaray ey Protaras aT TMT ATAS ATL RNY sega THATCH TET 854 aerseiarcreanacate ata tnattey PARTHTATS I: CANSTATSARIGNAL 898 faaetl Baa Tore ThA Wah TA ARSACAT HHATeTsAeL 20 Page No. 98 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Haritaki is astringent, sweet at the end of digestion, dry (causes dryness) devoid of lavana (possesses the remaining five tastes) easily digestable, kindles hunger, helps digestion, improves intelligence, best to maintain youth , hot in potency, laxative, bestows long life, strengthens the mind and the sense organs, cures leprosy (and other skin diseases) discolouration, disorders of voice, chronic intermittent fevers, diseases of the head, and eyes, anaemia, heart disease, jaundice, disease of the duodenum, consumption, dropsy, diarrhoea, obesity, fainting, vomiting, worms (intestinal parasites), dyspnoea, cough, excess salivation, haemorrhoids, disease of the spleen, distention of the abdomen, enlargement of the abdomen, obstruction of channels, abdominal tumors, stiffness of the thing, loss of taste (anorexia0 and many other disease arising from (aggravation of ) kapha and vata. 153-157. aqdaneh Vaart Tecra Similarly so is amalaka in all other properties it is cold I potency, and mitigates pitta and kapha. ae oh fet HeaAaAlsed Teg Aksha (vibhitaka) is pungent at the end of digestion, cold in potency, good for hairs and possesses properties similar (to haritaki and amalaka) but slightly less (in degree). 158 Triphala benefits: Sa Taare Fo HeAAATET | Woot casata FeqralAenwrarsrd |1%48 ll Thus, the Triphala (haritaki, amalaki and vibhitaki), together is a best rejuvenator of the body, cures diseases of the eyes, heals wounds and cures skin diseases, excess moisture of the tissues, obesity, diabetes, aggravation of kapha and Asra (blood) 159. Trijata and Chaturjata THR Toit carate Porc | Treavarta ctevisor wat WererereteL 1260 ll Twak — (Cinnamon), patra (Cinnamon leaf) and Ela — (Cardamom) together are known as Trijataka and these along with kesara from the chaturjata. They cause aggravation of pitta, are penetrating, hot in potency, cause dryness, improve taste and hunger. 160 Page No. 99 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Maricha (pepper) W Uh 7 aoe Ppt ART awe | Black pepper is pungent both in taste and at the end of digestion, mitigates kapha and is easily digestable. Pippali (long pepper) garsaa Tdigaitar sirat wat Persea a facaohh vee a eset facta sic: eave Gvar TA we: FAGUIT HfeToALATALARATHATTST ERT 82 at Tass Tatar fen Long pepper, in its green state aggravates kapha, is sweet in taste and cold in potency, not easily digestible and is unctous. The same, when dry, becomes opposite - aphrodisiac, pungent in taste, sweet at the end of digestion, mitigates Vata and Kapha, usefin in asthma, cough; is laxative. Long pepper should not be used in excess, for long period, without following the regimen of rejuvenation therapy. 161-162 Ginger benefits: aN aaet Gea aig gor fasetete 163 ved AY Taga Paseloor apart Nagara — (ginger), increases hunger, is aphrodisiac, water absorbent, good for the heart (or the mind), relives constipation, bestows, taste, easily digestible, sweet at the end of digestion, unctuous, hot in potency and mitigates kapha and vata. 163 cedar wa Bae oct rey Saleafrertaet aR HA ea Tera Similar is ardraka (fresh ginger, green); Trikatu - Pepper, long pepper and ginger — together known as trikatu, useful in obesity, Asthma, dyspepsia, cough, filariasis and chronic nasal catarrh. 164 afeatercitaet aad at: Chavaika (Piper chaba) and pippalimula (long pepper root) possess qualities and properties similar to Marica (black pepper) but in lesser degree. 165. fash) iva GA: ure erat: piAprogl Page No. 100 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chitraka (leadwort) is similar to fire in digesting thing and cures dropsy, haemorrhoids, worms and leprosy (and othe skin diseases). wapraaaAded ART Tae sa Katal Fear reaS Yet AITet TA The above, excluding marica, (pippali, pippalimula, cavya, citraka and nagara) is known as panchakolaka, It cures abdominal tumors, disease of the sleen, enlargement of the abdomen, distension and colic, and is best to improve hunger and digestion. farraratcranrarcanierehaecl ayaa Taye Hristo Bilwa, kasarya, tarari, patala and tintuka are together known as Mahat panchamula. It is astringent and bitter in taste, not in potency and mitigate kapha and anila (vata ) 167 aed Fectendicaamah: TA FAG afetelrareot aaterste Brihatidwaya (brihati and kantakari), amsumatidwaya (saliparni and prsniparni) and goksuraka- together are known as hrasva panchamula (Laghu panchamoola). It is sweet in taste and at the end of digestion, neither very hot nor very cold in potency and mitigates all the dosas. 168. The above two — laghu and mahat panchamoola constitute Dashamoola Ata Hhdidead afatedat UL Bala, punarnava, eranda, surpaparni dvaya (masaparni and mundgaparni) together from the madhyama pancamula. It mitigates kapha and vata, does not greatly aggravate pitta and is laxative. 169. Jivan Pancamula aftedNisiiaedrsitan years: THA shared q aayse gear carer gH Abhiru — Asparagus racemosus, vira, jivanti, jivaka and rsabhaka together from the jivana pancamula. It is good for the eye, aphrodnd mitigates pitta and anila (vata) Trina Manemula Trnakhya (trna pancamula) consisting of darbha, kasa, iksu, sara sali, mitigates pitta. 171 Thus, were described, in brief, the substances used daily as food, in groups such as suka, simbi, pakvanna, mamsa, saka, phala and ausadha. 182 Thus ends the chapter known as annaswarupa vijnaniya. Page No. 101 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 7 Anna Raksha Vidhi 3teertat fafer Protection of Food The 7th chapter of Sutrasthana of Asthanga Hrudayam text book is called as Anna Raksha Vidhi Adhyaya. Anna raksha refers to protection of food. This chapter deals with royal physician, features of poisoned foods and drinks, incompatible food combinations, effects and treatment, healthy sleep rules and celibacy. Pranacharya (Royal physician) :- Wat Vasgraet wroTaTe Feraerery adel a sackd waa vfconayia: The king should arrange for the residence of the royal physician near to the palace so that the physician can be vigilant about all things at all times. — 1 Heatttet fastaatafasrsor Herre: areal aqrrcal eratear afretaetrat: The foods and drinks of the king should be protected from poison, because, the King’s health and welfare depends on his food and drink and the health and welfare of the country is dependant on the King. — 2 Features of poisoned foods and drinks - seat fava Gest ucufearerantaa FeRor ead veal sacra facia: 3 FRRHVST aA Alero pL ae ataretred: aqua afeaanrieta: ¥ Boiled rice mixed with poison Sandra — becomes thick, Even when it is boiling, the contends do not overflow from the vessel.t Chirena Pachyate — takes a long time to cook, Pakvo bhavati paryushitopama — after cooking it becomes moist and stale, very soon Mayura Kantha Tulyoshma — emits steam with the colour of the peacock’s neck (blue), Moha moorcha prasekakrut — the steams and fumes from the container causes delusion, fainting and excessive salivation. Heeyate varna gandhadyaihi — quickly loses its original colour, odour, taste, texture, Klidyate chandrikachitaha — becomes watery and full of glistening particles. 3-4 Page No. 102 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan SAA UMY Yaad MIATA AT aT aa afore par orn eta sta at 4 taleduet dred ded gage weve: fafeoraiare Wet: WUSaT: MHA & The side-dishes dry up quick and become dirty reflective images seen in them appear deficient, malformed, abnormal or not seen at all; froth and lines appear on their surface and edges, threads and bubbles are likely to appear. Raga (sweet syrups), Khandava (sweet puddings), vegetables and meat become broken (liquid and solid portions get separated) and acquire bad taste. 5-6. ater welt TS, ava afk, aerfer eeact Gara, ATMA sh, Yo Teter eet Fede CAcHaaa, Tait Poor TH are Aearesret:, ate etede aevirga: Oh: WeaeNATATA Tea Gaeta FATA SHIM SATA FoTferaao TT Feet Hisenar aT raceuiaa: Area epiedtiated Fofaietientad: CATAAVSAM TA, Meet Arq IE ATL Galt apHSRARAMeyY Aer Neela Raji Rase — Blue lines appear in meat soup, Tamra ksheere - coppery red lines in milk and Shyava dadhani — black ones in curds Peeta Sita takre — yellowish white lines in buttermilk, Ghrute paaneeya sannibha — watery lines on ghee, Mastuni syat kapotabha — pegion like streaks appear on Mastu — Supernatent liquid of curds (whey), Raji krishna tushodake — blue black lines on Tusodaka (sour drink prepared from barley husk), Kaali madya ambhasoho — black lines on wines and water, Harit taile arunopama — green lines in honey and crimson lines on oils. Unripe fruits ripen (fast) and ripe ones become overripe and decomposed. Substances which are green and dry become dull in appearance and discolored., Soft food substances become hard and vice versa. The flowers of the garland become split at their edges, fade and assume unnatural smell. Dirty patches appear on cloth (dress and other apparels), its threads and hems fall out. Vessels prepared from metals, pearls, wood, stone, precious stones etc. become dirty, and lose their smooth touch and luster. Mud vessels gain smooth touch and luster. 5-11. Page No. 103 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vishada Laksana (features of the person who puts poison) :- fae: earagysnrean fererait chara feer: 22 HaCaT sitar: Cae FRAT The person who is about to poison someone will have Shyava shushka Asya — dry and discoloured ace Vilaksho Veekshate dishaha — eccentrically looks in all directions Sveda vepathuman — sweating and tremors Trasta — tired, Bheeta — frightened Skhalati — slips while talking and walking Jrumbhate — yawns frequently. 12 Testing of poisoned foods — Vishanna Pareeksha Weaest aay cafterarad: Kpecaict Rreatnvorst qatearrafarsretrarey Upon throwing the poisoned food on fire, it emits crackling sound, the flame emits as a single pile, without whirls, the colour of smoke resembles to that of peacock’s neck (glistening blue), sometimes the flame may not come up at all. It will cause emitting of very foul and strong smell. faced Aleta: wee apreh: anAeaT aT sHied TU Wed TeaheyeMNaT: ea: weaata, terfasifascttaca srr denen sie, sivas PareAeler: HUA CAT AHAHT ACA sedat anfe AraAR:, wep Arey: PRCA Aeadait saarayy Sled fAVaSMea ated Weta: war det faaegtealt at aigcteda: Mriyate Makshikaaha — upon eating such food, bees die Kaakaha kshaamasvaro bhavet — Crow voice becomes depleted Parot, Dathyuha (gallinule bird) and Sarika (Mynah) start hooting at the poisoned food just by seeing it. Hamsaha praskhalati — Swan changes its gait Glaanih: jeevenjeevasya jaayate — Chukar gets exhausted Chakorasya akshivairaagyam — Greeh pheasant’s eyes turn red Kraunchasya madodaya: — Pond heron becomes intoxicated Pigeon, Parabhrit (Cuckoo) and Chaktravaaka lose their life UdvegaM yaati maarjaara: — cat becomes irritated, excited Page No. 104 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shakrun munchati vanara: — monkey defecates After confirming the poisoned food by above methods, it should be disposed away carefully- 14- 18 Diseases caused by poisoned food — (Visha annaja Vikara) — FPS FT HUSA SAUTE: eaNTTegiea: eieh:, ATA Tae TEA: MeAeAT Welared AewaIeqaqsh: Tea eH AAAI AP OT Tere: External effects: The touch of poisoned foods produces itching and irritation, burning sensation all over the body, burning sensation at the site of touch, fever, pain, eruptions, loss of tactile sensation, falling of the nails and hairs and swelling. The treatment shall be bathing (washing), pouring with water processed with anti-poisonous drugs, application of paste of Sevya (Ushira), Candana (sandalwood), Padmaka — Wild Himalayan Cherry (heart wood) — Prunus puddum / cerasoides;, Somavalka, Talisa Patra — Cinnamomum tamala, Kushta (Saussurea lappa), Amrita (Tinospora) and Nata — Valeriana wallichi. 19-20. CCU CIE GMP ICICCICGLE ardent Tanicd SeETeaeT aH Pearerkeaa OST: ud a faerfatedy Local effect in oral cavity: Poisoned food inside mouth causes excess of salivation, inactivity of the tongue and lips, burning sensation, tingling of the teeth, inability to perceive taste and stiffness of the lower jaw. The treatment shall be mouth gargling with water processed with Sevya — Khus Khus — Vetiveria zizanioides and other drugs mentioned earlier and all other therapies for the mouth which are anti-poisonous. 21-21%. HARTY TACHA TAT: daest afrateeuaqeaeterery faeqPearsa HSM, TAMA et: serpent aafa aracaicasa ABI Pca WgIaAa TaASAT: aatateataReces efte weal ase fegattatersraateraercarasa: coget aa etet prpenvsndey ay AaASATIAY AaACTATM KAA Page No. 105 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Reaching stomach it produces sweating, fainting, flatulence, toxicity, giddiness, horripilations, vomiting, burning sensation, loss of movement of the eyes and heart, and appearance of black dots all over the body. Reaching of the intestines it produces vomiting of many colours, excess of urination, purgation, drowsiness, emaciation, pallor, enlargement of the abdomen and loss of strength. For both these conditions the patient should be administered Vamana (emesis) and Virechana (purgation therapies), followed by Nasya (nasal medication), Anjana (collyriums) and drinking of decoction prepared from Haridra — Turmeric Rhizome — Curcuma Longa, and Daruharidra (Berberis aristata), Katabhi— Celastrus paniculata, Guda- jaggery, Sinduvarita, Nispava, Baspika, Sataparvika, roots of Tanduliyaka, Kukkutanda — hen’s egg and Avalguja — Psoralea corylifolia to relieve the effect of poison. 22-26. Hrid Vishodhana — Gara Visha Chikitsa - Treatment to detoxify heart and to treat chronic poisoning: fasayrae qqured vertedaerecaay4 eH TNS: Her Baile galery Ae ee aa: wer Fr—Vier ares a Asse SATIS TaTAEqaa las 2 ord Faget areaty say afer: Faya: When there is poisoning, first vomiting and purgation therapy is conducted to remove remnant poison in the gut. Then, to cleanse and detoxify heart, Tamra bhasma is administered to the patient. After that, Swarna bhasma is administered for a long period of time. By such Swarna administration for long time, the body becomes as pure as Gold. The term used for this is “Hemapanga’. Na Sajjate Hemapange padmapatre ambuvat visham || In a person who has been given Gold bhasma for a long time, the poison can not do any harm, similar to a water drop that can not touch the leaf of the lotus. The person gains long life. The same treatment is followed in Gara Visha (chronic poisoning) also. Incompatible foods (Viruddha Ahara):- faseatt a aren faeaafayantaaa On many occasions, consuming two food items together or a particular type of food processing may render the food toxic. It is called as incompatible food. Even incompatible foods should be considered similar to poison / artificial poisoning. 29. Page No. 106 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Examples: faererccaea Acca Aceasatey Feria: Anupa mamsa with Masha, Kshaudra, Ksheera and Virudaka — Meat of animals of marshy regions is incompatible with black gram, honey, milk and germinated grains. Bisa, Mulaka (Radish — Raphanus sativus) or Guda jaggery is incompatible with fish. Fish with milk, especially Chilichima variety of fist with milk is incompatible. 30. ACIPAMRPPSTA cAAPSC HT: All sour substances are incompatible with milk. Sour fruits with milk is not recommended. Horse gram (Kulattha), Varaka, Kangu, Valla and Makustaka. - these are not recommended along with cow milk. 31/4. After consuming green leafy vegetables and radish, drinking milk should be avoided. 32. aNTé arfaer aearEcayr qeaperaet START Acct, ATT Foreha afd perarencer, fed: we fawsney arsaiatanstarpa wal Hol HECMEAHT Sta Teele a POYTSUTSTT aye alparelt TSA ar fal a Acasa Tad AVNET aT FReTHaa STOTT HATA fete Pork should not be taken along with porcupine meet. (Kukkuta) Chicken and Spotted deer should not be taken along with curds Uncooked meat along with bile radish along with black gram Sheep meat along with leaves of Kusumba herb Germinated grains along with Bisa Lakucha Phala along with black gram soup (masha supa) Banana along with butter milk is not recommended Curds along with Tala phala (Palm date) Pippali, Maricha and honey Kakamachi along with jaggery Black pepper along with fish or during digestion of fish - 33-36. PRY Sead Beco cawTHy Page No. 107 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pippali (long pepper) processed with the oil in which fish is fried should be rejected. Ghee kept in bronze vessel for more than 10 days should not be taken. Hot substances or hot procedures (like sun bath) is not recommended along with Bhallataka. 37. aiat favcad eer: aiPrcorawenttra: Meat of Bhasa bird — white headed vulture should not be roasted. Kampilla (a dish) prepared with buttermilk — 37/4. wate TR AT: GRAS aT Mixing of milk, beer and Krishara (rice — green gram dish) - 38 ayaticerctomnferente afeenteaer: UA aT HAM Teeted WEA 38, Mixing of equal quantities of any 2, 3 or all of the following is not recommended — honey, ghee, meat fat, sesame oil and beverages. Peal sft Acasa fecrarseq aera: Heat: aay, sia: Hectoraey Honey along with ghee, even in unequal proportions, should not be consumed along with water. Honey along with seeds of Pushkara, Honey, along with wine of dates (Maireya) and sugar Milk drinks along with Mantha (solution of corn flour) Turmeric with mustard oil is incompatible. sAean Hisar faretredat BAT Upodika (Indian spinach) processed along with sesame seed paste causes diarrhoea. - 41 aor avian Horaten feeeat sper aeaear Ga Beat ferercsayey Meat of Balaka bird along with Varuni (date wine) and Kulmasha (green gram and other pulses cooked together) Meat of Balaka along with pork fat is lethal. AeaicaicdTAaTSA MMA aahAS TCT: Wesaiseten BMaredcdett feared: Page No. 108 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Meat of Tittiri, peacock, Godha (Iguana Iziard), Lava (common quail), Kapinjala, cooked by the fire of wood ofcastor and processed with, fried in castor oil is lethal. BReraieaean Weal carreater shears Meat of Haridra (yellow bird) piered with wood of Haridra and cooked with the flame of Haridra is lethal. Meat of Haridra, cooked by smearing ash and sand, consumed along with honey kills the person quickly. Definition of Viruddha — incompatible - Ue fairae aT Sercey a Sta acl TAN: | ¥S | fava | In brief, whichever food or activity that causes increase of Doshas but does not expel the Dosha out of the body is termed as Viruddha. Note: In Panchakarma treatment also, Dosha is increased and then expelled out of body. But in Panchakarma, though there is increase of Dosha, because they are expelled out, there is no harm. But in Viruddha Ahara, the food causes only increase of Dosha, leading to toxic symptoms. The treatment for incompatible food consumption is eearer eat at ce farrrerar: Shodhana — purification procedure — Panchakarma Shamana — palliative treatment Virodha chikitsa — symptom based treatment. geet a yd etrearerepia: Health should be restored quickly by using food that have opposite qualities to that of incompatible foods. CATASATA IAMS T: FATT ATA, Faxteate a Wierd areraaed a slot Ye Page No. 109 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan In those who exercise regularly, who are habituated to oily fatty food, who have good digestion power, in young, and strengthful, the incompatible food will not cause any ill effects. In those, who are habituated (sathmya) to incompatible food and in those who take low quantities of incompatible food for a long period of time, the ill effects will not be seen. 47 Satmikarana Krama — (method of accustomization) :- Ua eaAAeA Wasa aT Aor feta fed aqaeelraenpay ec Unhealthy things — foods, drinks, activities which have become accustomed by long use should be discontinued by quarter and quarter gradually. Similarly healthy things (foods etc.) should be gradually made use with intevals of 1, 2 and 3 days. 48. sama ie cord effect weaaa ar FCAPS SAA ASAT ZeAAIT ys Sudden discontinuance of unhealthy things, foods, drinks etc. and indulgence in healthy things, done suddenly and improperly give rise to diseases 49 weoatIa ere: HAVA TAT TUT: Uedt Tea AT ECT afed oT The ill effects of incompatible foods that eliminated gradually and good habits developed gradually leads to robust health. aHgaeuct spat a Facer adsteter Wise men should not help the intimate vitiating factors by indulging in unhealthy things. Trayopastambha - Three pillars of life - FeRAM Tasted: | ee asa fererarmfas ah: | Sz Il Ahara — food, Shayana — Sleep and Abrahmacharya (non-celibecy) — properly indulged, support the body constantly just like the house is supported by the pillars. Page No. 110 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sleep — Nidra - faced Ba Ge give: aed sora FNM setae Ata Siac TT 43 Happiness and unhappiness, proper nourishment or emaciation, strength and debility, sexual powers and impotence, knowledge and ignorance, life and its absence (death) — all are dependent on sleep. 53. sae WwESser a a faa fersfaar arash werpAtel HTeRTPARATT Sy Akaala nidra — sleep at improper time, Atiprasanga — excess sleep Na nidra — lack of sleep — these three destroys health. 54. tal SreRur wai, Easel Weatet fear seaarsaieg carded 9s Ratri jagarana — Keeping awake at nights (avoiding sleep) is dry (causes dryness inside the body), Divasvapna — sleeping during daytime is unctuous (causes moistness inside) and Taking a nap sitting comfortably (during day) is neither dry nor unctuous 55. asa aRTeareren ea aera: feareatel feat seateael HwHcaaet fF a: PMH: Force CATACH ATT: Sleeping during day time is beneficial during summer, because in that season, Vata undergoes mild increase, dryness is more, nights are short; Day sleeping during other seasons causes Kapha and Pitta increase. Who can have day sleep? agAa: Hp: Fay: at efetcaMea Aleteat faut: avotet a sta ore feremeatty Day sleeping is good for those who are exhausted by excessive speaking, riding, walking, wine, woman (sexual intercourse), carrying heavy load, physical activities, tired by anger, grief and fear, for those suffering from asthma, hiccup, diarrhea, for the aged, the children, the debilitated, the emaciated, those having injury, thirst, abdominal pain, indigestion; those assaulted, those Page No. 111 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan intoxicated, and those who are habituated to day sleep. In them it maintains the normalcy of the tissues and the Kapha nourishes the body. 56-59. Who should not have day sleep? Obese, in whom Kapha is aggravated, who take regular oily food, Those who are suffering from poisoning and throat disease patients should not sleep even at night. HAMA ASAE ATT: PRRsreaHeccaAManreafeatAeadr: 6k da SIAN Aaa TATA Sleeping at improper time causes delusion, fever, lassitude, nasal catarrh, headache, dropsy, oppression in the chest (nausea), obstruction of the tissue pores and weakness of digestive function; for this fasting, emesis, sudation and nasal, medications are the treatment. 61-61. anrefaart dew weacasstet Adel Agel fect cars eitenaitper: upRa wT fra ane: wesarfaaqsear In case of excess of sleep, strong emetics, collyrium, nasal drops, fasting, worry, sexual intercourse, grief, fear and anger are advocated. By these the Kapha gets decreased leading to loss of sleep. 62-63. fetarererrea sare RATAN STE STAT: asaseneararaetaeal VV ATasT: Loss of sleep leads to squeezing pain in the body parts, heaviness of the head, too much of yawning, lassitude, exhaustion (even without strain), giddiness, indigestion, stupor and diseases of Vata origin. 64. aarareaaa feat wat Aaa Bera: FEFASAIRTES Wer: FAME TAAL Hence, the person should sleep at the proper time at nights daily as much as desirable and become habituated to it. If he has kept awake at night due to non-habituation (not accustomed to), he should sleep for half that period, the next morning without taking any food. 65. SIC EC GAG Sa MIRCCURSIGEAL HSA AM ea er Cee HO AT TOA PIAA AA RTT. fergie: perpen Fell Hehe Tava: HA ferenpayeT: Page No. 112 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan TEMA ATG fet ESAT: Pera Haass Fa aro afer Those suffering from very little sleep (or no sleep at all), should indulge in the use of milk, wine, meat soup and curds (as food), oil massage and mild squeezing (of the body), bath, anointing the head, ears and eyes with nourishing oils, comforting embrace by the arms of the wife, harbouring the feeling of satisfaction of having done good deeds and resorting to things which are comforting to the mind as much as desired; these bring about the pleasure of good sleep. For those who follow the regimen of celibacy, who are not very crazy of sexual intercourse and who are contented with happiness, sleep will not be very late than its regular time. 66 — 68. Abrahmacharya — non celibacy - TESTA oleae TACT SPRTABRATART SscashorA gate sieeerpeat Fai apis SAA HA AT ACA ETT OTT, qaoqast fad Recta searat seer: SCCIOs g:Rerargat: foea: ae gat saddest T Ayer Sex — the person should avoid the woman who is not lying with her face upward, who is in her menstrual period, who is not liked, whose activities are displeasing, whose private parts are dirty and who is troublesome; who is very obese or very emaciated, who has recently delivered and who is pregnant; The other woman (other than his wife), and the nun, the other animals like the goat, buffalo etc., should be avoided. Avoid sex in the abode of the teacher, gods and kings in monasteries, burial ground, places of torture and of sacrifice and meeting of four roads. Should avoid days of special significance (new-moon, full-moon, eclipse, festivals, mourning days and others), Avoid organs which are non-sexual, (oral etc) and also the days forbidden for sex, avoid violence during sex. Should not indulge in sex after a heavy meal, without keen intention, when hungry, when his body is in uncomfortable postures, when thirsty; with children, with the aged (old women), when troubled by other urges (such as of urine, faeces etc.) and when he is himself a patient. 69-72. Rad HAA: HI Feat arsitpar feat FURTETA SAAT: TAIT Severe: During Hemanta and shishira (winter) the person can indulge in copulation (daily) as much as he likes after making use of aphrodisiacs (and obtaining strength); Page No. 113 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Once in three days in Vasanta (spring) and Sarat (autumn) and Once a fortnight in Varsha (rainy) and Nidagha (summer). 73. aqHeTAalaeaaere ied tee ere: STG T Cees eee: rsa Giddiness, exhaustion, weakness of the thighs, loss of strength, depletion of tissues, loss of acuity of senses and premature death occur from improper indulgence in the woman (sexual intercourse). 74. Rapes: (aT Aco Hated FAY AAT: Il ws I Good memory, intelligence, long life, health, nourishment, acuity of sense organs, reputation, strength and slow ageing accrue from disciplined (controlled) indulgence in the women. 75. FATAL ATTICA fe AVS AM AAG I A: Haat Urey weet faxdt caer aetaarey egy: gaia aver After the act, the man should indulge himself in bath, applying scented paste, exposure to cool breeze, drinking of syrup prepared from sugar candy, cold water, milk, meat juice, soup, Sura — fermented liquor prepared from grains, Prasanna — clear supernatant fluid of Sura and then go to sleep; by these, the vigour of the body returns quickly to its abode again. 76. araRa aye Heae carci avis Paeet cena fraer srafet faqercts: careeadiiictrena: Tapers sia: The king who has implicitly reposed the protection of his body with his physician, who is well conversant with the scriptures and its practices efficient in work and kind, attains great valour, health, fame, influence, capacity to enjoy the fruits of all his actions and a long life. 77. Thus ends the 7th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana. Page No. 114 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 8 arated 3eara Food habits & Indigestion The 8th chapter is called as Matrashiteeya Adhyaya. It includes — right quantity of food to take, right time to take food, types of indigestion and their treatment, qualities and types of after drinks, right method of food intake ete. Right Amount of Food — Aharamatra Apeksha: araelt adenret Caesar fF steer: wafer AMT geaToaated TROUT gyeAT ¢ TOTS Tye aero Arama fetiese Be aac fastafa 2 One should always consume proper quantity of food. Right amount of food activates Agni — digestion power (which is compared to fire, in Ayurveda). Food that are light to digest (laghu) and those that are hard to digest (Guru) both require a specified quantity for proper digestion. As a general rule, if the food is heavy to digest (such as oily food, non veg, sweets etc), it should be consumed till half of the satiation level is achieved. (Ardha Sauhitya). If the food is light to digest, it should be consumed till one is not overly satiated. (Na Ati Truptata). The right amount of food is that, which undergoes digestion easily. Effect of taking more or less amount of quantity of food — aloe sear g a aotvaatat Consuming less quantity of food does not increase strength, ojus (immunity). The body will not be nourished properly. Over a period of time, it leads to Vata imbalance disorders. Excess quantity of food is again not desirable. It causes quick increase of Doshas. 3 — 3/4. Effects of over eating: Gaara fe aarea Batedet HiT: ¥ Aes Beat Tease Hat fasersriedl someih calddech fear s Page No. 115 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Due to eating excess quantity of food, Vata and other Doshas suddenly get increased together and associating with the undigested and vitiated food (Ama) , produce diseases. It causes Alasaka disease by blocking the movement of food inside the alimentary tract and Visuchika (gastro enteritis) by expelling out the undigested food in both downward and upward directions (diarrhoea and vomiting) simultaneously. This is seen in persons who are not self controlled and who can not control their craze for eating. 4-5, Alasaka — indigestion + constipation: vara sled aeieaterent A oT ues & STARRY ered A stent: Ta: Food neither comes out in the upper route by vomiting nor from the downward route by purgation. Nor does it undergo digestion in the stomach. It stays in the stomach lazily (=Alasya). Such a disease condition is called as Alasaka. 6. Visuchika ~ Gastro enteritis fafadl: deritgcateanie, sqeratact: & qfafaka arariot faeachict fear Due to sudden and profound aggravation Vata, along with other Doshas, the person experiences pain in entire body, as though being pricked by needles, hence this disease is called Visuchika. (Suchi means needle). Influence of different Doshas in Alasaka and Visuchika - TA YAAATAMCHETEAHIEA shore ¢ PPESCUSTTSAAFASTTATET: & In Alasaka and Visuchika, Tf Vata is aggravated, it causes Shoola — adominal pain Bhrama — Delusion Anaha — bloating, fullness Kampa — tremors. Stambha — stiffness etc symptoms. If Pitta is aggravated, it causes Jvara — fever Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery Antardaha — internal burning sensation Page No. 116 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Trut — excessive thirst Pralaya — panic, unconsciousness If Kapha is aggravated, it causes Chardi— Vomiting Angaguruta - heaviness of the body Vak Sangha — Difficulty to speak Shteevana — excessive salivation, expectoration and spitting Manifestation of Alasaka symptoms: Uist Adaleat WISH TEAK vo Ierdkel HEd cas kesrcraatstarey °e at Herm: Alasaka occurs especially in those who are weak, who have low digestion strength and who suppress urges of the body, habitually. In them, Vata gets increased, gets associated with Kapha to obstruct the movement of undigested food in the digestive tract. It causes the food to stay inside the stomach, as a foreign body. It leads to abdominal colic and such other symptoms, but without vomiting and diarrhea. 10-11. Dandalasaka — weatevered ater gserieraga: ued: fesace wat ausad earsrafed Ue kz USHA ATT of AoteTYHIOT Highly vitiated Doshas, move into vitiated and obstructed channels by accumulation of undigested food. Thus Doshas get obstructed in the GI tract, and begin to move in other unnatural channels. Thus Doshas spread throughout the body and make it stiff like a log of wood. This disease is called Dandakalasaka, which should be rejected for treatment as it is quick in causing death. 12. Ama Dosha fase seaeraraietehfeat farcry ¢3 faveueaittcaid faeetrmAcdd: ty Persons who indulges in Viruddha Ashana — taking incompatible foods, Page No. 117 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Adhyashana — taking excess food Ajeerna Ashana — Eating over undigested food, develops the dreaded Amadosa which is similar to poison. Hence it is also called as Amavisha (undigested food poison). Such a person should be refused for treatment because of its similarity with poison, quickness in causing death and requiring treatments of opposite nature to one another Doshas and qualities. 13 — 14. Treatment of Alasak HU STA Hong Tea TaRaafer al ica Srarretret areor atoriccta: 25 APTA Uganter yet feaeenter ve aed Ama — undigested food stagnating inside the Gastro intestinal tract should be removed quickly after deciding the conditions of easy management. The person is made to drink warm water mixed with powder of Ugra (Vacha — Acorus calamus), Patu (Saindhava — Black Salt) and Phala (Madanaphala); This will cause vomiting; This therapy is followed up with Swedana (sudation therapy) Next, Phalavarti (rectal suppositories) prepared from fruits which help downward movement of feaces and flatus should be administered, The parts of the body which are rigid should be well fomented and then wrapped with cloth. 15 — 16. Treatment of Vishucika faqeat aifegerat orevai: ate: wereact acetate fara SUA to In advanced stage of Visucika, branding by fire over the heel, is recommended. The patient should be made to fast on that day and taken care of as the one who has undergone purgation therapy. All the post Virechana procedure and treatment should be given to the patient. 17. Aama Dosha Chikitsa ATR arate Perc ererest aitreray HAMA Here Aol Tr aretsererctay 18 felgeareatt wast far: ASAT The patient of indigestion though having severe abdominal pain should not take pain killing drugs; the Agni — digestive fire which is associated with Ama — improperly processed metabolites Page No. 118 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan will not be able to digest the Doshas, drugs and food; the severe troubles arising from these three will soon kill the patient. 18. sfoterct q sss Boral EaeeraTwEy arses welts: weyers 7 After the food is found digested, if stiffness and heaviness of the abdomen persisting, then the medicines should be given to digest the residue Doshas and to stimulate the Agni — digestive power. 19. MERA THIO Hafel FP ATTIC Pifaer fae ate acatler ware Diseases produced by Ama — undigested food, become relieved by Apatarpana (non- nourishment); three kinds of Apatarpana, appropriate to the three Doshas should be adopted after careful consideration of all aspects. 20. TAT Aga Tes, ACY Tso WaT If Ama is little, only Langhana (fasting) will be suitable, If it is moderate Langhana (fasting) and Pachana — digestive drugs are needed; if it is severe, then Shodhana (purification Panchakarma therapy) is necessary; for these will expel out the Dosha and Ama from the very root. 21. Treatment principle for diseases Even the other diseases should be treated by adopting treatments which are opposite of their causative factors. It is called as Hetu Viparyaya Chikitsa. Hetu means causative factors. If, however, the diseases reoccur or persist for long time then the Hetu Viparyaya should be given up and disease specific treatment should be adopted. It is called as Vyadhi Viparyaya Chikitsa. avert a, vad ay fag a oa ana S TASES Alera: Or Tadarthakari Chikitsa (therapies which, though not actually opposite of either the cause or the diseases still produce the desired result) should be adopted; When the Doshas have returned to normal, when the Ama is completely relieved, when digestion activity is completely restored to normalcy, then oil-bath, drinking of oil (oleation therapies) and enema therapy, etc. should be administered appropriately. To gain the lost strength in the patient. 22-24. Page No. 119 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Ajirna Bheda — different kinds of indigestion — solet a appre aa erat aiferarosar: wether Sala: weentcrereraiaay 25 Vitiation of Kapha causes ”Ama Ajeerna” It is characterized with swelling of the eyes socket and cheeks, belching similar to those which come up immediately after meals, excess salivation, nausea and heaviness of the body. 25 faseset afore eet fase sTeATaEpa Vishthabdha ajirna - this type of indigestion is caused due to vitiated Vata and is characterized by pain in the abdomen, constipation, flatulence and debility. eae Taare ualearArectesiNaleacl Vidagdha ajirna - this type of indigestion is due to vitiated Pitta and has thirst, fainting, dizziness, giddiness, sour belching and burning sensation as its symptoms. 26 Ajirna Chikitsa - Treatment of Indigestion age HaTA A, fascstl Taast ayer] faase qHet, Yaa Uaaee ct ada Ww For Ama ajirna, Langhana — fasting should be done;| For Vishtabdha Ajirna, Swedana (sudation therapy) should be done; For Vidagdha ajirna, Vamana (emesis therapy) should be done, or any therapy appropriate to the stage of the disease can be done. 27 Vilambika disease: INA sdeciieraned Tereitetee HATATTST SAS ACHAT 28 Vilambika — another kind of indigestion occurs due to profound accumulation of Ama inside the channels. It is caused due to vitiation of Kapha and Vata, and has all the symptoms of Ama; its treatment also is similar to that of Ama. 28 Page No. 120 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Rasashesha Ajeerna -another type of indigestion HIST FEACTA USHA SqaTe TANT: enfta faracars waearenferat fear 28 Rasashesha ajeerna - Lack of enthusiasm, discomfort in the region of the heart in spite of pure belching are the features of Rasashesha ajirna — another kind of indigestion. Such a person should sleep for some time during day without eating anything. Patient of indigestion of any type should sleep during day without taking any food, later, when he develops hunger he should eat little quantity of easily digestible food. 282-29 Ajirna Samanya Laksana — general symptoms of indigestion:- faseetafaugicaal torferateceyear 30 Diarrhea or constipation, exhaustion, inactivity of Vata, distension of the abdomen, feeling of heaviness and dizziness are the general symptoms of Ajirna (indigestion). 30 Ajirna Anyakaranani — other causes of indigestion aw Ufa AaeaATAITS Hae afascfatse rare seraapeware rere face (sacar Test 7 orite STA FA T eilenshreraqarte tay: Consuming large quantity of food is not the only cause for production of Ama Dosha; foods which are disliked, which cause flatulence, which are over-cooked or uncooked, which are not easily digestible, which are dry, very cold, dirty (contaminated), which cause burning sensation during digestion, which are dried up or soaked in more water, do not undergo proper digestion; so also the food consumed by persons afflicted with grief, anger, excess hunger ete. 31- 324 Dushta Ashana — bad food habits: fast wea UT rt AA AAA facaretaered saa storey eret aE Wet at aed q fava Aoactatet AY a GN carefieyotied aT Page No. 121 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Consuming suitable and unsuitable foods mixed together is known as Samashana, Consuming large quantity of food even before the previous meal is digested constitutes Adhyasana, Consuming less or more quantity at improper time is Vishamashana, - all these three either cause death or dreaded diseases. 33 — 34 Ahara vidhi — regimen of diet — Te MES fer fet Rasealeor oe TeAe: Sse Ae arfagatiaetirarty Tara: agate fafreaeat eilrareenteter: aaRacar Petey caretfeeltel Srererey AKL yeaaen faxge 3f8 ofaoeeraRareret Tae PTA qeay al AT Kale Satmyam - Food should be consumed at the proper time, Shuchi Hitam — it should be the accustomed, clean, suited to health, Snigdha, Ushna, Laghu — unctuous, hot and easily digestible; Tanmanaa — consuming food with due attention Shadrasa, Madhurapraayam — should contain all the six tastes with predominance of sweet taste, Na Atidruta, Vilambitam — partaken neither very quickly nor very slowly; Snataha — after taking bath, Kshut vaan — after having good hunger, Viviktastha -sitting in solitude, Dhauta Pada kara aananaha — after washing the feet, hands and face, Tarpayitva pitrun, Devan, Atitheen, Balakaan, Guroon — after satisfying the Pitrus (manes), gods, guests, children and Guru. After satisfying even the dependents maintained in the house (such as servants, horses and other animals for receiving service, parrots and other pets etc.), after carefully considering one’s own constitution, likes and dislikes, without scolding / abusing the food, without too much of talk; should partake more of liquid food, that which is liked, in the company of the liked persons, and served by those who are clean and faithful to him. 35 — 38 Hater TUS SCH He Yet: v csp SF MHA ALAS SAGA At Food which is contaminated with grass, hairs etc; re-heated, which consists more of vegetables and undesirable grains, which is very hot and very salty should be rejected. 39 Page No. 122 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Food that should not be consumed habitually - foiled fey pray a aA PAY SHALE aM AAAS MATA Arsfersaraerropiaarasediwsna Herne Aachel HA Tat efter Kilata (dairy product — sweet in taste), Dadhi — Curds, Kuchika (solid part of curds), Kshara (alkalies), Sukta (fermented gruel), Ama Mulaka — Uncooked radish, Meat of animals which are emaciated, dry meat, meat of the boar, sheep, cow, fish and buffalo, Masha (black gram), Nishpava; Saluka, Bisa, Pista (powdery, starchy), germinated grains, dried vegetables, Yavaka (small barley), Phanita (half cooked molasses) — those should not be consumed habitually. 40 — 41. Pathya — food that can be consumed habitually (on daily basis, for a long time) — efrertreorieraheyaaas ite potlss1err Aiersourpaitae dara orarernr 3 Tete gd ear ornare ret eaaTeT AT: Yatecdiqnaietaaisaae tra Shali (rice), Godhuma (wheat), Yava — Barley — Hordeum vulgare, Shashtika (rice maturing in sixty days), Jangala (meat of animals of desert like lands), sunisannaka, Jivanti — Leptadenia reticulata, Balamulaka (young radish), Pathya (Haritaki) Amalaka (Amla — Indian gooseberry), Mridwika — dry grapes, Mudga — green gram, Sarkara (sugar), Ghrita (ghee), Divyodaka (rain water or pure water), Ksheera (milk), Kshoudra (honey), Dadima — Pomegranate - Punica granatum and Saindhava — Rock Salt (salt) can be consumed habitually. 42 — 43. Page No. 123 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Prot wyarseat ee stages 7 Faeearegiedpeted Waitesaart UT Aq Triphala along with honey and ghee should be consumed at nights daily for strengthening of eye sight. Any other thing which is good for promoting/maintaining health and dispelling diseases can also be consumed habitually. 43’. Food that should be consumed at the beginning of meal — fadeqaradtararate ncaa ie pay Healged TS feast Tag Hee Feat WE: fantaraaed ALY Area He Foods which are not easily digestible, which are unctuous — fatty, sweet, slow and hard such as Bisa, Ikshu (sugarcane), Mocha, Coca, Amra (mango), Modaka (sweet meat ball), Utkarika (sweet dish) etc., should be consumed at the commencement of the meal. foods of opposite qualities, at the end of the meal, and those which are predominantly sour and salt, in the middle of the meal. 45 — 451. Sever Hareatelt aerate TAT Two parts of the stomach (half of its capacity) should be filled with solid foods, one part by liquids and the remaining one part should be kept vacant for accommodating air etc. 46 Anupana — (after — drink) :- areet Reot ae mares arene hae Ae aHeE cra Sorr BT PM Wears, eyonat ¢ APSHA ane Aree, Aad AM tach a wah afl Ge a ae Toe: Wee war HAH Cold water is the ideal after-drink (Anupana) — after meals containing/ prepared from Yava — (Barley) and Godhuma — wheat, after consuming Dadhi— Curds / yoghurt, wine, poison and honey. Page No. 124 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Warm water is ideal after-drink for foods which are starchy, Mastu — Supernatent liquid of curds (whey), Takra (diluted buttermilk) Amla kanjika (fermented gruel); dishes prepared from vegetables and Mudga (green gram) and other legumes : Sura (beer) is the ideal after drink for lean person. Honey mixed water is the ideal after drink for obese person. Meat soup is good after drink for the emaciated, Wines are ideal after a meal of meat and to those who have poor digestive capacity; Milk is best suited just as nector for those who are debilitated by diseases, medicines (and therapies), walking long distances, speaking, sexual intercourse, fasting, exposure to sun and such other tiresome activities; for the emaciated, the aged, and children. 47 — 50. An ideal Anupana fawtc wertes ach earefane a HTT SAT, Aaa AcHAETT An ideal Anupana ( after-drink) is that which has properties opposite of those of the foods but not incompatible with them; such an after- drink is always valuable. 51. Benefits of Anupana: see ateyet Pied cals Tarssrare FeRsuataceaasraiedoMet T Anupana — after — drink invigorates, gives contentment, helps proper movement of food inside, stability of the body parts; loosening of hard masses of food, their proper liquification (moistening) and digestion. 52. Contra indication for Anupana — aledargrevanrearan: eraser Aa T ERAS T ahead It is not good in diseases of the organs above the shoulders (ear, nose, throat, eyes and brain related diseases), dyspnoea (COPD, Asthma), cough, injury to chest (lungs), rhinitis, for those engaged in singing and speaking and in hoarseness of voice. 53. WieFoteeie SATA TARTAR: 2 Page No. 125 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Drinking liquids should be avoided by those who are over-hydrated, who are suffering from polyuria, diseases of the eyes and throat, and wounds (ulcers). 54. All persons — both healthy and sick should avoid speaking, walking long distances and sleeping immediately after consuming liquids; exposure to sun and fire, travel in vehicles, swimming and riding on animals soon after consuming food. 54%. Ahara kala — proper time of meals:- The ideal time for taking meals is after the elimination of feaces and urine, when the mind is clean (devoid of emotions), when the Doshas are moving in their natural paths (functioning normally), when belching are pure without and foul smell or taste, when hunger is well manifest, when the flatus is moving downward easily, when the digestive activity is keen, when the sense organs are clear functioning, when the body is light. Food should be consumed observing the tules and procedures of taking food. That is the ideal time. 54 — 55. Thus ends the chapter called Matrashitiya, the eighth in the Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 126 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 9 Dravyadi Vigyaniya gearefaareta The 9th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana is called as Dravyadi Vijnaneeya Adhayaya. It explains about substances and its qualities, how a medicinal substance brings about action etc. Importance of the substance - Dravya Pradhanya Dravya — (substance / mass of the substance) is the most important factor among Rasa (tastes) and other qualities; because all of these qualities are residing in the substance only. Sach at Dravya/Mass is composed of five basic elements. acdearatersors stad afrergicataesea craeered sre It has Kshma — solidity as its substratum, it takes origin from Ambu (Ap Bhuta — water element), Agni (Tejas Bhuta — Fire element), Pavana (Vayu Bhuta — air element) and Nabhas (Akasha Bhuta — ether element), with their intimate and inseparable combination. Its identification/designation is decided by the predominance of particular element in the Dravya (mass / substance). 1-2. Notes :- Panchabhuta refers to five basic elements — Earth (solid), Water, Fire, Air and Ether. As per a philosophy, called as Sankhya philosophy, every substance on earth is composed of these five basic elements, in different proportions. The dominant part of the basic element decides the nature of the substance. Five Basic elements — Prithvi — Earth — Gandha (smell) is the special quality, Guru (heaviness), Khara (roughness), Kathina (hard) etc are its general qualities. Ap — Water — Rasa (taste) is its special quality, Tejas — Fire — Rupa (appearance) is its special quality Vayu — Air — Sparsha (touch) is its special quality Akasha — Ether — Shabda (sound) is its special quality Page No. 127 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan These elements combine together in an inseparable combination (Samavaya) to become gross objects and give rise to the formation of all the substances of this universe. Hence the entire universe is Panchabhautik (composed of five elements, hence designated as Prapancha). The proportion/quantity of each Bhuta (element) varies and hence the existence of variety of substances in this universe, each one very different and unique. Whichever element is predominant in any substance bestows its name to that substance. If Prithvi Bhuta (earth element) is more than the other four in a certain combination, then the substance the gets formed is called Parthiva — solid; If Ap Bhuta (water element) is dominant — then Apya — liquid If Tejas Bhuta (fire element) is more, it will be Taijasa (Agneya), if Vayu Bhuta (air element) it will be Vayavya, and if Akasabhuta (space element) is more, it will be Akasheeya (Nabhasa). Thus all the substances of the universe are classified into five kinds. Rasa — Anurasa — (Primary and secondary tastes) :- TEARS Geel SAAS AT TST, aes ede WeEAA Cora Ca: Tet: 3 Taste in a substance also arises out of Pancha mahabhuta (5 element) combination. Hence, because of the combination of the elements, there is no substance having only one taste. Similarly, there is no disease arising out of a single Dosha. Any disease will have involvement of more than one Dosha. Taste (rasa) is of two types. Primary taste (Rasa) — the taste that is perceived clearly. The one that manifests clearly in a substance. seared: Piraaed carctaiy dead Secondary taste (Anurasa) — which are not clearly manifest or which are recognized at the end. 3. ater sek yfeerdt Taare ¥ TY aed wMeatraa: Guru (heaviness) etc qualities present in the Prithvi (earth) etc substances of are residing in the taste of the substance); Qualities of a substance are ascribed to the taste because of their intimate co-existence. Page No. 128 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Qualities of substances based on the predominance of elements — Qualities of solid substances — (Parthiva Dravya Laksana)- TF Fes TS Cet RAT Teer Pea ofa aka eet user scams Earth has — Guru (heaviness, heavy to digest), Sthula (bulky), Sthira (stable) and Gandha (smell) qualities. Hence, substances that have Earth as the predominant element (Parthiva Dravya) have Gaurava (heaviness), Sthairya (stability), Samghata (compactness) and well nourished qualities — 5 Qualities of liquid substances (Apya Dravya Laksana) — oa eit ae Reaver Aeg Meg Tees & HCE Tegel fAsaeE Fee YEAS Ir Liquid element has Drava (liquidity), Sheeta (cold), Guru (Heavy to digest), Snigdha (unctuous, oily, moisture), Manda (dull), Sandra (thickness, dense) and rasa (taste) qualities. Substances containing liquid as predominant element (Apya Dravya) have Snehana (lubrication, moistness), Avishyanda (secretion, moisture, production), Kleda (wetness), Prahlada (satiation, contentment, satisfaction) and Bandhakrut (cohesion, binding, holding together) qualities. 6. Agneya Dravya Laksana — (qualities of Agneya substances) :- wat cevteor fawrayer BHT, Bag Te AT TOT Gee Tae Agni has qualities such as Ruksa (dry), Teekshna (penetrating, sharp), Ushna (hot), Vishada (non-slimy), Sookshma (minute) and Rupa (appearance, showing, from) Substances that have fire as the main element causes Daha (burning sensation), Bha (luster), Varna (expression of colour) and Pachana ( digestion, process of transformation, putrefaction etc.) 7. Qualities of airy substances — Vayaviya Dravya Laksana — aed warfeere oy Taos gear ora dereqa feat sorfetarpay Air has Rooksha (dry), Visada (non-slimy, clear), Laghu (lightness) and Sparsha (touch tactile sensation) qualities Page No. 129 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Airy substances posses qualities such as Ruksa (dry), it produces dryness, Laghava (lightness), Vaishadya (transparency, clarity), Vichara (movements, different kinds of activities) and exhaustion 8. Qualities of ether dominant substances — Nabhasa Dravya Laksana:- are Yer fare Ay eeqgeilesrey ied arse Ether has Sukshma (minuteness), Vishada (transparence, clarity), Laghu (lightness) and Shabda (sound, hearing) qualities. Substances with ether dominance produce cavitation (hollowness) and lightness (weightlessness) 9 Nothing is non-medicinal:- saTeaaratyet at fairae aqua aes aera arent avrat: to There is nothing in this universe, which cannot be used as medicine.Knowledge and purpose of each substance is required to use any substance as medicine. 10. Properties of Dravyas FCT TI TAY aise Taetlcanca Fire (Agni) and Pavana (air) predominant substances generally have the property of moving upwards serena a apres at crane te Bhumi (earth) and Toya (water) dominant substances generally have the property of moving downwards — 11 Veerya (potency) :- aatcae art aq fad aa ar far ¢3 areas pec firaceat dria fF ar Master Charaka says that Virya is that property, through which drug action is made possible. No drug action is possible without Veerya and all actions are possible only by the Virya 13. Some authors opine that there are 8 types of Veerya (potency of an herb/medicinal substance). Page No. 130 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan oe waisor Het wv aed AAAS Guru (Heaviness) and Laghu (light to digest) Snigdha (unctuous, oily) and Rooksha (dryness) Hima (cold) and Ushna (hot) Mrdu (soft) and Teekshna (piercing, strong) 12. qafesta dread sealife aia FAT TERY warycas featcry CHANTS AACA TETAS Those who designated Guru (Heaviness) etc. eight qualities as Veerya, do so by direct implication. Out of 20 qualities, these 8 qualities are predominantly seen in any substance, these 8 qualities are stronger than the rest qualities, are important in day - to - day routine, applicable to majority of substances being considered first in scientific procedures. Hence, these 8 have been given importance. 14-15. Why Rasa and Others are not called as Viryas? Hava fantacaa Bracers aa ar - because these are opposite to the 4 reasons mentioned above, hence gurvadi 8 qualities are the viryas. Dividha Viryas seo efit afattaree defaced sft a AMAA get arectstat Aeracit aeMaed ATA Acar AA TT Some other authors consider Ushna (hot) and Sheeta (cold) — only these 2 qualities as Veerya (potency). Because, though substances are of many kinds and qualities, only fire and water (Agni and Soma) are the powerful ones. 17-18. Page No. 131 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Action of Hot Potency (Ushna Veerya) - AAT a Fe Feel Fae ae sMeyoTeheT: WH T TawHnar: atte, Hot potency causes Bhrama — Delusion, Dizziness Trut — excessive thirst Glani — exhaustion, Sveda — perspiration, Daha — burning sensation, Ashupakita — quick cooking (transformation) and mitigation of Vata and Kapha; Action of cold potency (Sheeta Veerya) — Toleat Slaet Fars wee Teattecar: Sheeta Virya causes Hladana satiation, happiness, Jivana — livings, activities of life, enlivening Sthambha — stoppage, withholding, restraining and Rakta Pitta Prasada — purification of blood and calming of Pitta. 18-19. Vipaka — taste after digestion:- MOUs AeAgeia TAKA, Cet TRoTAect A faa siet FAA: 20 The change in the tastes that a substance undergoes at the end of digestion by the association of Jatharagni (fire in the stomach — digestion power, digestive juice in stomach), is called as Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion). 20. Types of Vipaka FAG UELT AQ, HEN HAL Tea TA: faecireornsraren faa: weer: ag: 21 There are three types of Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion). Swadu (sweet) and Patu (salt) tastes undergo Madhura Vipaka (sweet). Sour remains as sour itself - Amla — Amla Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion) Tikta (bitter), Ushna (pungent) and Kasaya (astringent) tastes will generally be Katu Vipaka (pungent). 21. Page No. 132 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan So, generally, sweet and Salt tastes get converted into sweet taste Sour remains as sour and Bitter, pungent and astringent convert into pungent. Teal Teathoreast Hee esas AL The effects of the tastes, which are felt in the mouth and of the Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion) are similar. That means the effect of sweet taste and sweet Vipaka are similar. 21’. Mechanism of action of substances —- Karma Vidhana — fairad at Het HA Tee UIA 22 apnecter ator weracta fersaet Substances act by the action of taste or by Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion) or by the qualities that they posses (Guna (qualities)) or by Veerya (potency) or by special effects. 22 eae TY Tara Todecdar ada 23 Which ever the one that is powerful among them (Rasa, Guna, Vipaka, Virya and Prabhava) it suppresses all the other qualities to exhibit special influence and action. fase gor Harel spared fe frat In case of combination of two opposite qualities, the strong one vanquishes the weak. 23 — 24. we fauraect det vsracaeaieia soared Tardtenfate shaft gore When two opposing qualities are present in equal strength, in that situation, Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion) wins over Rasa (taste); Veerya (potency) wins over (Rasa (taste) and Vipaka and Prabhava (special effect) wins over all of them (Rasa, Vipaka and Veerya) This is the pattern of natural strength. 25. Prabhava — special effect:- Special action exhibited by a substance over-ruling Rasa (taste), Guna (qualities), Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion) and Veerya (potency) is Prabhava. Page No. 133 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Though Rasa, Guna, Vipaka, and Veerya in a drug may be similar, sometimes the herb may exhibit entirely different action opposite to these qualities. That special effect of the drug over- tuling inherent qualities is called as Prabhava. Example — aect taededeane feanes fata Danti and Chitraka — Though Danti — Baliospermum montanum is identical with Chitraka (plumbago zeylanica) in respect of Rasa (taste) etc, Danti is a purgative while Chitraka is not. Hence, purgation is the Prabhava of Danti. Similarly so, are Madhuka — Licorice — Glycyrrhiza glabra) and Mrdvika (grapes) Madhuka and dry grapes — both have similar qualities. But dry grape has mild purgative action, but Madhuka does not. Milk and ghee — both possess similar qualities. But ghee increases digestion strength but milk does not. Hence increasing digestion strength is the special effect of ghee. 26. Vichitra Pratyayardha Dravya — extraordinary substances:- Sia Wea: Ha Geaale, TT TL fafa wesc meet ardfst arp Ba: SOOT ACEM: TA: ect ag: Rel at epee: A special category, known as Vichitra Pratyarabda exists. It means — born out of peculiar combination of peculiar factors. For example: both wheat and barley possess sweat and heaviness qualities yet wheat mitigates Vata but barley aggravates it. Fish and milk are sweet and heavy but still milk is cool and fish is hot. Meat of lion and meat of pig both are sweet in taste but still lion meat has Katu Vipaka (pungent taste conversion after digestion) and pig meat has sweet Vipaka (taste conversion after digestion). Thus ends Dravyadi Vijnaniya chapter of Astanga Hrudaya Sutrastana. Page No. 134 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 10 Rasabhediyam tad Tastes, Their Qualities and Effects th The 10° chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana is called as Rasabhediya adhyaya. Rasa means taste and bheda means types. This chapter discusses in detail regarding the types of tastes and their properties. Tastes — Types and introduction Origin of taste — Rasa utpatti — eae Hit SAT HEGdeT: GW ay seraferrmere: qatioath: Hae ct: ALT Tate: ¢ The tastes are formed due to the combination of two Bhutas (primary elements). Madhura (sweet) — Prithvi + Ap (earth + water) Amla (sour) — Tejas + Ap (fire + water) Lavana (salt) — Ap + Tejas (water + fire) Tikta (bitter) — Akasa + Vayu (ether + air) Katu (pungent) —Tejas + Vayu (Fire and air) Kashaya (astringent) —Prithvi+ Vayu (earth + air) - 1. Characteristics of tastes - Rasa Lakshana — Swadu / Madhura (sweet) aT Tact Fale a aeaaet irra HATA CSET Tolaell HaTWAT Get: Swadu / Madhura (sweet) is understood by its sticking in the oral cavity, providing a feeling of contentment and pleasure to the body and comfort to the sense organs. It is liked even by ants 2. Amla (sour) Amila (sour) makes the mouth watery, causes horripilation, tingling of the teeth and leads to closing of the eyes and brows. 3. Page No. 135 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Lavana (salt) FAT: PACA HUST ATS HT Lavana (salt) causes more moisture in the mouth (increase salivation) and burning sensation in the cheeks and throat. 3. Tikta (bitter) faedl farrqucared waa ofeefed a Tikta (bitter) cleanses the mouth and destroys the organs of taste (makes perception of other tastes impossible). 4. Katu (pungent) sedsrate freq palftatatrat ae: waaia seared atc ada a Katu (pungent) stimulates the tip of the tongue, causes irritation, brings out secretions from the eyes, nose and mouth and causes burning sensation of the cheeks. 5 Kashaya (astringent) aM sae feat Hvala TaeIpa Kashaya (astringent) inactivates the tongue (diminishes capacity of taste perception) and causes obstructions of the passage in the throat. 51. Action of tastes - Rasa Karma Sweet taste - Madhura Rasa (taste) HAMM PSI Mee Vso TH arerge ata after act ser sfena sioner WEA FEI: HVS: Cae Aletha TS: Sweet taste being accustomed since birth, produces greater strength in the body tissues. It is very good for children, the aged, the wounded, the emaciated, improves skin complexion, hairs, strength of sense organs and Ojas (essence of the tissues, immunity). Sweet taste causes stoutness of the body, good for the throat, increases breast milk, unites fractured bones. Page No. 136 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sweet taste is not easily digestible, prolongs life, helps life activities; It is unctuous, mitigates Pitta, Vata and Visha (poison). By excess use it produces diseases arising from fat and Kapha, obesity, Asthma, unconsciousness, diabetes, enlargements of glands of the neck, malignant tumour (cancer) and such others. 7-9 Sour and Salt tastes — soot are fear cae: rover: wetland ory: RMA HB AG SAA Her: Ama (sour) stimulates the Agni — (digestive activity), is unctuous, good for the heart, digestive, appetizer, hot in potency, cold on touch (coolant on external applications, relieves burning sensation), Sour taste satiates, causes moistening, it is easy for digestion, causes aggravation of Kapha, Pitta and Asra (blood) and makes the inactive Vata move downwards. ag wgaa frat ete faewte qe satet Sour taste if used in excess, causes looseness of the body, loss of strength, blindness, giddiness, itching (irritation), pallor (whitish yellow discoloration as in anaemia), Visarpa — Herpes, spreading skin disease, swellings, Visphota (small pox), thirst and fevers. 10— 11%. Salt taste — Lavana rasa : Aa: FA USHA seer fae sitet ret: Facet: chev raeteedadiapd a sfcgrdt saved wferet afert ater Fe HS fas faster serecarnae, Torey Lavana (salt) relieves rigidity, clears the obstructions of the channels and pores, increases digestive activity, lubricates, causes sweating, penetrates deep into the tissues, improves taste, new growth, abscess etc.). Used in excess, it causes vitiation of Asra (blood) and Vata, causes baldness, graying of hair, wrinkles of the skin, thirst, skin diseases, effect of poison, Visarpa — Herpes, spreading skin disease and decrease of strength of the body. 12 — 13. Bitter, Pungent and Astringent tastes - fara: Fae anifeasoy: srefel pit ge fas HS HoT saiceeeae Wed Hpel oa Fag Ael Ta AST wearer: Page No. 137 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan orient fear war: Caeapnvelaewne4ct: ergarer aiferoreareie, sifeatancanticr a: Bitter taste: Tikta by itself is not tasty, but it cures anorexia, worms, thirst, poison, skin diseases, loss of consciousness, fever, nausea, burning sensations; Bitter mitigates Pitta and Kapha, dries up moisture, fat, muscle-fat marrow, faeces and urine; Tikta Rasa is easily digestible, increases intelligence, cold in potency, dry (causes dryness), cleanses breast milk, and throat. Used in excess, it causes depletion of Dhatus (tissues) and diseases of Vata origin. 14 — 16. Actions of pungent taste — Katu Rasa Karma — He: TAMAT Sad HS Horry etsy FO Haat: TAA: Feasts: aloet: Wael SAT: Mell HeageT SVT: fSeanit see Mas faquifa ware: Hed A Hisar PU eswaeraay, Feat spade HET Hoey eTaey Pungent cures diseases of throat, allergic rashes, leprosy and other skin diseases, Alasaka (a kind of indigestion), swelling (odema); reduces the swelling of the ulcers, dries up the unctuousness (greasiness), fat, and moisture (water); Pungent taste increases hunger, it is digestive, improves taste, Shodhana (cleansing, eliminates the Dosas), dries up moisture of the food, breaks up hard masses, dilates (expands) the channels and balances Kapha. By over use, it causes thirst, depletion of Sukra (reproductive element, sperm) and strength, fainting (loss of consciousness) contractures, tremors and pain in the waist, back etc. 17 — 19. Actions of astringent taste - Kashaya Rasa Karma — PMT: Wectentel sete Tereiterer: Usa Voor: efta: Fae Aelfaeirser: STeAeHA Te Baisiiet car Tae: Kashaya (astringent) balances Pitta and Kapha, it is not easily digestible; cleanses the blood, causes squeezing and healing of ulcers (wounds), has cold potency, dries up the moisture and fat, hinders the digestion of undigested food. Astringent taste is water absorbent, thereby causing constipation, drynessand cleanses the skin too much. Page No. 138 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan alter effet: & sie fascataret Gat: qe aed shes sie adhe Heraerey Used in excess, it causes stasis of food without digestion, flatulence, pain in the heart region, thirst, emaciation, loss of virility, obstruction of the channels and constipation. 20 — 21%. Madhura Gana — group of sweet substances: Ye gH FsratsarrarargeT HA seeder Tae Watleets erase, Ae dae: WWteatchaedt sian aseit Ae Ath fart feet saci ax error gaat aftoat area ae Ghrita (ghee, butter fat), Hema (gold), Guda (molasses), Akshoda, Mocha, Chocha, Parushaka, Abhiru, Vira, Panasa, Rajadana, the three Bala (Bala, Atibala and Nagabala), The two Medas — Meda and Mahameda, The four Parni — Shalaparni, Prishnaparni, Mudgaparni, Mashaparni, Jivanti — Leptadenia reticulata, Jivaka — Malaxis acuminata D.Don / Microstylis wallichii Lindl. , Rishabhaka, Madhuka — Licorice — Glycyrrhiza glabra, Madhuka — Madhuka longifolia, Bimbi— Coccinia grandis / indica, Vidari — Pueraria tuberosa, the two Sravani — Mundi and Sravani, Ksheerasukla, Tugaksiri, the two Ksheerini, Gambhari, the two Saha, milk, sugarcane, Gokshura, Ksaudra, Draksa etc. form the group of sweet substances. 22 — 24. Amla Gana — group of sour substances: SF opto rch SATA aaah ser Hite aca Dhatriphala — Amla, Amlika — tamarind, Matulunga, Page No. 139 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Amlavetasa — Garcinia pedunculata Roxb. / Rheum emodi Wall., Dadima — Pomegranate — Punica granatum, Rajata (Siver), Buttermilk, Chukra, Palevata, Dadhi — Curds, Mango, Amrataka, Bhavya — Dillenia indica, Kapittha — Feronia limonia / Limonia acidissima, Karamardaka etc. form the sour group. 25 — 26. Lavana Gana — group of salts:- at dade poot fas craze, Dash Ugo eet ava AUT aT: Varam (Saindhava — Rock Salt), Sauvarcala (sochal salt), Krishna (black salt) Bida salt, Samudra (table salt), Audbhida, Romaka, Pamshuja, Seesa (lead) and Kshara (Alkalies) form the salt group. 27. Tikta Gana — group of bitters :- fara: delet artect avernteie deaerL erates Hen TINT WeacHHy AAAS Sfetaret HET aarewraney OTST HT AT STIS AT ASS Pelee TTT AL oedaet Agiecaeat faenet aifefasrear Patoli, Trayanti — Gentiana kurroa, Valaka, Usira — Vetiveria zizanioides, Chandana — Sandalwood, Bhunimba — The creat (whole plant) — Andrographis paniculata, Nimba — Neem — Azadirachta indica, Katuka — Picrorhiza kurroa, Tagara — Indian Valerian (root) — Valeriana wallichi, Aguru, Vatsaka — Holarrhena antidysentirica, Naktamala, Turmeric and tree turmeric, Musta — Nut grass (root) — Cyperus rotundus, Murva, Atarushaka — Adhatoda vasica, Patha — Cyclea peltata, Apamarga - Prickly Chaff Flower — Achyranthes aspera, Kamsya (bronze), Ayas (iron), Guduchi — Tinospora cordifolia Page No. 140 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Dhanvayasaka, Mahat Pancamula — Bilva, Agnimantha, Shyonaka, Gambhari, Patala the two Vyaghri — Brihati and Kantakari, Visala, Ativisha, Vacha etc. form the group of bitters. 28 — 29’. Katu Gana — group of pungents:- gal fess ARapiAisaa TaKlHaL porter eae: Bed Aaa Hingu- Asa foetida Maricha — Black pepper, Krimijit — Vidanga, Panchakola — Chitraka, Pippalmoola, Pippali, Chitraka and ginger, leafy vegetables such as Kutheraka and others (mentioned in verse 103 of chapter 6 earlier), Pitta (bile of animals), Mutra (urines), Arushkara etc. form the pungent group. 30 -30'. Kashaya Varga (Gana) — group of astringents: amore: veer RT: wert Ay HEFAGER FFATATAM TST Group of astringents consists of Pathya — Chebuic Myrobalan (fruit rind) — Terminalia chebula, Aksha — Terminalia bellirica, Shireesa, Khadira — Black catechu (heart wood extract) — Acacia catechu, Madhu (honey), Kadamba, Udumbara, Mukta (Pearls), Pravala (Coral), Anjana — Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata (antimony), Gairika — Purified Red Ochre, Bala kapittha, Kharjura — dates, Bisa — lotus stalk, Padma — Nelumbium speciosum, Utpala — Nymphaea stellata ete 312 — 32. Page No. 141 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan General properties of tastes and exceptions:- Madhura AY wea wat sierearferrared Fea aeera: etter Para argaronfersrey Generally, substances of sweet taste increase Kapha except old Shali (more than one year old rice) and Yava — Barley — Hordeum vulgare, Mudga (green gram), Godhuma (wheat), Kshaudra (honey), Sita (sugar) and meat of animals of desert — like lands. Amla WY 3teet Pecdotetead afsaracaied Generally substances of sour taste aggravate Pitta, except Dadima — Pomegranate — Punica granatum and Amalaka (Indian gooseberry). Lavana HA HAT WT: Taos Bera Generally salts are bad for the eyes (vision) except Saindhava — Rock Salt. Tikta and Katu fart He THATS HG aH TAL RA HATTA SA yosrH Oo Tater: Generally bitters and pungents are non-aphrodisiacs and aggravate (increase) Vata except for Amrita (Indian tinospora), Patoli, Shunthi (ginger), Krishna (long pepper) and Rasona — Garlic — Alium sativum. Kashaya HTS Wa: et Fare TRA Paar Astringents are usually cold (in potency) and obstructive — except Abhaya — Chebulic Myrobalan (fruit rind) — Terminalia chebula. 33 — 351. Page No. 142 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Tastes and potency Hot Potency TH: Harare faefoirson wate Katu (pungent), Amla (sour), Lavana (salt) are of hot potency (Ushna Veerya (potency), each one, more so in their succeeding order; Cold Potency fara: aerat aeedcada ot eficen: Similarly Tikta (bitter), Kashaya (astringent) and Madhura (sweet) are cold in potency, each one more in their succeeding order. Ruksha faced: He: HMA BAT TEAATETAT Tikta (bitter), Katu (pungent) and Kashaya (astringent) are dry and cause constipation (each one more so in their succeeding order) Snigdha Broa: Rast: AScravy Aa: aS z) ih E while Patu (salt), Amla (sour), Madhura (sweet) are unctuous and help elimination of faeces, urine and flatus, each one more so in their succeeding order. Guru Gel: HUAATATET ALT: WA TB: Patu (salt), Kashaya (astringent) and Madhura (sweet) are heavy to digest, each one more so in their succeeding order Amla ANA: HECATAT TEA a fart: While Amla (sour), Katu (pungent) and Tikta (bitter) are easy to digest, each one more so in their succeeding orde 36 — 38'. Page No. 143 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Rasa Samyoga Samkhya — number of combination of tastes:- arent alracdar aereyet fasiract The combination of tastes will be fifty seven, but their actual counting will be sixty three, on the basis of their usage (in daily routine of selection of drugs, planning of therapies etc.) UhHeleaneael TIE Aled TA alae free rargéeneo: oe Atel uefecered vane UP Se CaQVIA Hee: TE: AHA asaardaAdiral AY: UST Aact serach Vs yrAT VET: Eliminating 1 rasa at each combination , the number of combination of 2 rasas each will be 15 In the combination of 3 rasas each, it will be 10 with svadu, 6 with amla, 3 with lavana, | with tikta total 20 In the combination of 4 rasas it will be 10 with svadu, 4 with amla, | with lavana total 15 In the combination of 5 rasas it will be 1 with amla, 5 with svadu total 6 In the combination of all the 6 rasas it will be one Each rasa individually will be 6 Thus forming 63 combinations in total Ve WIHT, Ie T YW: Kadeiaat wsaaerrent Fara faeaferaaa ger vereaefata Asto Page No. 144 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan TO SUM UP The combination of 5 rasas it is 6 1 of six rasa individually e — It is 15 of twos It is 15 of fours 20 of threes 1 ofall tastes together Total = 63 Each taste separately = 6 1. Madhura 2. Amla 3. Lavana 4. Katu 5. Tikta 6. Kashaya Combination of 2 tastes = 15 Madhura + amla Madhura + tikta Madhura + lavana Madhura + kashaya Madhura + katu Amla + lavana Amla+ tikta Amla + katu . Amla +kashaya 10. Lavana + tikta 11. Lavana + katu 12. Lavana +kashaya 13. Tikta + katu 14. Tikta+ kashaya 15. Katu + kashaya CEAIAMWALWNS Combination of 3 tastes =20 Madhura + amla + lavana Madhura+ amla + tikta Madhura+ amla + katu Madhura + amla + kashaya Madhura+ lavana + tikta Madhura + lavana + katu Madhura+ lavana + kashaya Madhura + tikta + katu . Madhura+ tikta + kashaya 10. Madhura + katu + kashaya 11. Amla+ lavana + tikta 12. Amlat+ lavana + katu 13. Amla+ lavana +kashaya CRI DAWRYNS Page No. 145 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 14. Amla+ tikta + katu 15. Amla+ tikta + kashaya 16. Amla+ katu + kashaya 17. Lavana+ tikta + katu 18. Lavana+ tikta + kashaya 19. Lavana+ katu + kashaya 20. Tiktat+ katu + kashaya Combination of 4 tastes = 15 1 Madhura + amla + lavana + tikta 2 Madhura+ amla + lavana +katu 3 Madhura+ amla + lavana +kashaya 4. Madhura + amla + tiktat+ katu 5. | Madhura+ amla + tikta+ kashaya 6. Madhura+ amla + katu + kashaya 7 Madhura+ lavana + tikta + katu 8 Madhura+ lavana + tikta + kashaya 9. Madhura+ lavana+ katu + kashaya 10. Madhura + tikta + katu + kashaya 11. Amlat lavana + tikta+katu 12. Amla+ lavana + tikta + kashaya 13. Amla+ lavana + katu + kashaya 14. Amla+ tikta + katu + kashaya 15. Lavana + tikta + katu + kashaya Combination of 5 tastes 1. Madhura + amla + lavana + tikta+ katu 2. Madhura + amla + lavana + tiktatkashaya 3. Madhura + amla + lavana +katu + kashaya 4. Madhura + lavana + tiktat+ katu + kashaya 5. Madhura + amla + tikta+ katu + kashaya 6. Amla + lavana + tikta + katu + kashaya Combination of 6 tastes =1 1. Madhura + Amla + lavana + tikta + katu + kashaya a Wea taeda Reva a died Wel Acta svAsaangwatsa: These Rasa (primary tastes) and Anurasas (secondary tastes) in their proportional (more, moderate and less) combinations become innumerable. These are to be selected and used after considering the conditions of the Dosas and drugs (and therapies). 44. Thus ends the chapter entitled Rasabhediya, the tenth in Sutrasthana of Ashtangahurdayam. Page No. 146 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 11 Tridosha - aterfé faatert - Knowledge of doshas he chapter of Sutrasthana of Ashtanga Hrudayam explains in detail regarding Tridosha in Ayurveda. Tridosha are — Vata, Pitta and Kapha. Understanding Tridosha concept is your first step towards learning Ayurveda. The chapter is called as Doshadi Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. Chief constituents of the body :- Dehasya Mulam — aTeTGae Fer Hey SEES | Dosha — Vata, Pitta and Kapha Dhatu — Body tissues — Rasa (lymph / product of digestion), Rakta (blood), Mamsa (muscle), Meda (fat), Asthi (bone), Majja (bone marrow) and Shukra (male and female reproductory secretions) Mala — waste products — sweat, urine and faeces Doshas, are the roots of the body. 1. Functions of normal Doshas — Prakruta Dosa Karma — Functions of Vata Dosha - SAgeoa fava AserasTacet: FEAT T Mee HAN Tere T O° i : Vata is responsible for all movements. (Movement of blood in blood vessels, movement of nutrients, movement of air in lungs, locomotion movements of hands and legs etc. ) In its normal state Vata causes enthusiasm, Vatha Dosha regulates respiration process, Regulates all locomotor movements, Regulates all activities of mind, speech, initiation of natural urges (tears, faeces, urination, sneezing, coughing, vomiting yawning etc) maintenance of the Dhatus (tissues) in their normalcy and proper functioning of the sense organs. Page No. 147 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Functions of Pitta Dosha — airs vfamaretenetenercepared: In its normal state Pitta causes digestion and metabolism Maintenance of body temperature, vision, Causes hunger, thirst, appetite, Maintains skin complexion, intelligence, courage, valour, and softness (suppleness) of the body. Functions of Kapha Dosha - YACHT FEU ca Satara fore are ATA IC fat: Kapha confers stability, lubrication, compactness (firmness) of the joints, Kshama — It is the cause for mental capacity to withstand or withhold emotions, strains etc. It is also cause for forgiveness 1/2 — 3. Functions of body tissues and waste products — Prakrita Dhatu Mala Karma — Functions of body tissues — MIHCHMALT AeA AVS Hat HATA TTA ¥ Rasa Dhatu (product of digestion and metabolism) — provides nourishment Rakta (blood) maintenance of life activities, Mamsa (muscle) — enveloping (covering) — it covers around bones and enables voluntary and involuntary actions Meda (fat) — lubrication, Asthi (bones) — support, forms the framework of the body Majja (bone marrow) — filling the inside of the bones and Shukra (male and female reproduction system)- conception and pregnancy 4. Page No. 148 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Functions of waste products — HATCH: TOT, AAT ele aT ST Taas Fela faepier: Maintenance of strength of the body is the chief function of faeces; Elimination of moisture (water) is of urine, and Slow elimination of moisture is of the sweat. 5. Effects of increased Doshas — Vriddha Dosha Karma:- Effects of increased Vata — Gard Hee siete: HIGHS SATA HEME HAST, Tortora fog aaa aA TAT: Vata, when increased produces Karshya — emaciation, Karshnya — black discoloration, Ushnakamitva — desire for hot things, Kampa — tremors. Anaha — bloating, fullness, distention of the abdomen, Shakrut Graha — constipation, Bala bhramsha — loss of strength, Nidra bhramsha — loss of sleep Indriya bhramsha — loss of sensory functions, Pralapa — irrelevant speech, Bhrama — Delusion, Dizziness giddiness Deenata — timidity (peevishness). 5'2— 6. Effects of increase of Pitta Halavreracarefesarerettetga: Teaw Pitta when increased produces yellow discoloration of the faeces, urine, eyes, and skin; excess of hunger and thirst, feeling of burning sensation and very little sleep.6 2. Page No. 149 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Effects of increased of Kapha gasaAT sfFTAqTaHTaeaaa ealeareaawssed LaeHrafatersar: Kapha, when increased produces Agnisadana — weak digestive activity, Praseka — excess salivation, Alasya — lassitude, laziness Gaurava — feeling of heaviness, Shvaithya — white discoloration, Shaithya — coldness, Shlathangatva — looseness of the body parts, Shwasa — dyspnoea, asthma, COPD Kasa — cough, cold Atinidrata— excess of sleep. 7 — 7'A. Effects of increased body tissues — Vriddha Dhatu Karma:- TH HP gerne wad Praicate father POTARAA AMO THA: CAST AeA SAAT: AR TUsTee ae UsVS SAA hea: avoriey sae ACaACEAM TAA set HT ded vars Rweedalarirdera FeeeaEaageaea Tae SS UCCCUGE Paper set 7 aia Fe Us HAV HT Rasa when increased in similar to Kapha, produces the same symptoms of increased Kapha; Rakta (blood) when increased produces Visarpa — Herpes, spreading skin disease, Pleeha — diseases of the spleen, Vidradhi — abscesses, Kushta — skin diseases Vatasra — gout Pittasra - bleeding disease, Gulma — abdominal tumors, Page No. 150 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Upakusa — a disease of the teeth, Kamala — jaundice, Vyanga — discoloured patch on the face, Agninasha — loss of digestion strength Sammoha — Coma, unconsciousness, Red discoloration of the skin, eyes, and urine. 8 — 9. Mansa (muscle tissue), when increased produces Ganda — cervical lymphadenitis Granthi — tumor, Increase in size of the cheeks, thighs, and abdomen, over growth of muscles of the neck and other places 9 — 91. Medas (fat tissue), when produces similar symptoms and in addition, it causes fatigue, difficulty in breathing even after little work, drooping of the buttocks, breasts and abdomen. 9/2 — 10. Asthi (bone tissues), when increased causes overgrowth of bones and extra teeth. 101. Majja (marrow), when increased produces heaviness of the eyes and the body, increase of size of the body joints and causes ulcers which are difficult to cure. 102-11. Shukra (semen) when increased produces great desire for the woman (sexual desire) and seminal calculi (spermolith). 12. Effects of increased waste products — Vriddha Mala Karma — paraeatet Hert ska aaa esp aa ¢ steateredte pet Heap ara Fact aifaeda dhieea avg: Shakrit (feaces), when increased causes distension of abdomen, gurgling noise and feeling of heaviness. 12% Mutra (urine), when increased produces severe pain in the bladder and feeling of non-elimination even after urination. 13 Sweda (sweat) when increased produces excess of perspiration, foul smell and itching. 13’ ud a aaa The increase of Dushika (excretion of the eyes) and other waste products are to be understood by nothing their increased quantity, heaviness (of their sites) and such other symptoms. 14. Page No. 151 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Functions decreased Doshas — Ksheena Doshakarma - Decreased Vata produces symptoms like — fersat afer 3fetel HSCS Tal HoT HVA feta HAASEAA LACH GS CYT ATAMAAE A: Angasada — debility of the body, Alpa bhashite hitam — the person speaks very little Sanjna moha — loss of sensation (awareness) and of consciousness and occurrence of all the symptoms of increased Kapha. 15. Decreased Pitta causes Toca Aral Heer: efter warerfer: Mande anala — weakness of digestive activity, Shaitya — coldness and Prabha hani — loss of luster (complexion). 15%. Decrease of Kapha causes art ata: VARA Youd Saga: erereraieua Bhrama — Delusion, Dizziness, Shunyatva — emptiness of the organs of Kapha, hrudrava — tremors of the heart (palpitation) and Shlatha sandhita — looseness of the joints. 16. Symptoms of decrease of Dhatu (body tissues) — WH test srr: erst vorfet: erecrafesorar TrasTFaa RAH fanned aewwea: A setvonfetsusieHsesHateaaeat: Aaa caret Hearcctel Gis: Heser HAAG: Ace Sechestaiey seat Asaf eT art: fafaraterL ee Nid weeta ee eMeraaa ar det set quortiga yarrdia a Page No. 152 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Decrease of Rasa dhatu produces dryness, fatigue, emaciation, exhaustion without any work and noise intolerance. Decrease of Rakta produces desire for sour and cold things, loss of tension of veins (and arteries) and dryness. 17. Decrease of Mamsa causes debility of the sense organs, emaciation of cheeks, buttocks and pain in the joints. 17’. Decrease of Medas causes loss of sensation in the waist, enlargement of spleen and emaciation of the body. 18. Decrease of Asthi causes pain in the joints, falling off of the teeth, hairs, nails etc. 181%. Decrease of Majja causes hollowness (of the bones inside) giddiness and seeing of darkness 19. Decrease of Shukra results in delay in ejaculation, ejaculation accompanied with bleeding, severe pain in the testicles and a feeling of hot fumes coming out of the urethra. 20. Symptoms of decreased waste products — Gee aeaearier Aetsel aveaiecta apait safc areyed ecured disaet sperey ae sed aacpegrd feat arate at Fag Vaegia: Fae Cpeet cau: AOMATATY FEAT Gorea Tara aT Fanaa Ae eae: Decrease of faeces gives rise to gurgling noise in the intestines and bloating, vata moves in upward direction in the intestine causing discomfort and pain in the region of the heart and flanks. 21. Decrease of urine causes scanty urination, dysuria, urine discoloration or hematuria. 21'. Decrease of sweat leads to falling of hair, stiffness of hair and cracking of the skin. 22. Decrease of Malas which are of little quantity is difficult to perceive, it should be inferred from the dryness, pricking pain, emptiness and tightness of their sites of production and elimination. 23. arerdiat uened a faeure, grearat fers are faattaret aoe atietet a qe Ace Asared as aia feasta: Page No. 153 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The decrease of Dosha Dhatu etc can be observed by the increase of opposite qualities. The increase of Dosha Dhatu etc can be observed by the increase of similar qualities. The increase of Malas is observed by their non-elimination (too much of waste product accumulation leading to obstruction) and their decrease by too much of elimination in little quantities. 234 — 24'. Heilfdatcad Cees eat Gfeed tise: Body being accustomed to accumulation of waste products (in intestines and bladder) , the decrease of waste product formation is more troublesome than their increase. 25. Relationship between Dosha and Dhatu gesAT ITY, deter Hear sara FAT: Fanes aqraes atlararqoityery Vata resides in Asthi (bones) Pitta resides in Sweda (sweat) and Rakta (blood) Kapha resides in rest of the Dhatu and Mala. In case of Pitta and Kapha, when there is an increase of Pitta or Kapha, there is also respective increase of tissues and waste products associated with them. For example, if Pitta increases, then sweat and blood vitiation also increases. The same rule applies to decrease as well. But in case of Vata, if Vata decreases, then Asthi increases. They are inverse proportionately related with each other. 26 — 27. Cause for increase or decrease of Dosha ort gets aero AACHOT HATA TAT ASAT: Ta PaT ATL AGEN Hepa AEHTST Beary AA Karey fant are ele pare Aseersevt: aie, dsoted ca scmeriforct: The increase of Doshas, Dhatus and Mala is usually due to excess nutrition (Tarpana), which is followed later on with increase of Kapha. Whereas the decrease of Doshas, Dhatus and Malas is due to loss of nutrition which is followed, later with increase of Vayu (Vata). Page No. 154 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Hence, the diseases arising from increase of Dosha and Dhatu should be usually treated quick by adopting Langhana (therapy causing thinning of the body, reducing the quantity) The diseases arising from the decrease of Dosha and Dhatu should be treated with Brimhana therapy (causing stoutening the body, increasing the quantity etc.) But in case of Vata, the order is reverse. If Vata is increased, then Brihmana therapy (nourishing therapy) should be adopted and if Vata decreases then Langhana therapy should be adopted. 28 — 29. farteraragqataenst tecafataraet: Ag hastarel Warrel eeaaTAT serena fat: ealererafrarer Acsraeuaseard rare ya erecta eee AAT fasdigorecirantaen, Rrcarataret Fagieerateaed Agpestaterear ARTATAsaaAeAAe: FAG aA ATL In particular the disease arising from - increase of rakta should be treated with- a. blood letting and b. Purgations. Increase of mamsa by use of - a. sharp instruments (surgery), b. caustic alkalies and, c. fire cautery. Increase of medas by therapies indicated for obesity, and decrease by therapies indicated for emaciation. Decrease of asthi by enema therapy using - a. milk, b. ghee and, c. bitter drugs. Increase of vit / feces by the use of - a. abdominal viscera of ram or goat, b. half steamed pulses, c. barley and, d. the two varieties of masha etc. as food. Increase and decrease of mutra / urine - By adopting treatments indicated for diabetes and dysuria respectively. Decrease of sveda / sweat by adopting - a. physical exercises, b. oil bath, c. sudation therapies and d. use of wine. Page No. 155 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kayagni FRUIT HAART MTT Hie: ast aafaditara eadqgqieearea: wat org: we patege: afteres aafeaert Kayagni present in its own place, has portions of itself, present in the dhatus also. Their decrease in qualities, quantities or functions give rise to increase and decrease of dhatus respectively. The proceeding dhatu which is either increased or decreased gives rise to the succeeding dhatu of the same condition. Effects of vitiated Doshas — Dusta Dosha Karma — arer Sever Weitqerel quatect Ser Acey Ha aad , ara RAS, Ulet Taaaerfet a He Aeselfer KYAUS ASAT ser: The Doshas which are vitiated [become abnormal undergoing either increase or decrease] cause vitiation of the Rasa and other Dhatus (tissues) next; Both Doshas and Dhatus together vitiate the Malas (waste products) which in turn, vitiate the Malayanas (channels of their elimination). Malayana — routes of elimination of waste products are — two below — anus and urethra, seven in the head, and the channels of sweat; from these vitiated channels develop their connected diseases. 34/2 — 36. Ojas — the essence of Dhatus :- Hoe TAM ea oleae WL FTL eoueuAre cafe aerate ferartery Raed Bach ee SI oferty Genet frat areit ufeateasofa fasofa favqeged aet strat fafaer cease: Ojas is the essence of the Dhatus; It is mainly located in the heart. It is present all over the body and regulates health. Page No. 156 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Qualities of Oja — Snigdha — unctuous, oily Somatmaka — watery Shuddha — clear (transparent), Ishat Lohita Peetakam — slight reddish yellow in colour; Loss of Ojus leads to loss of life. All aspects of health are related to Ojas. Cause for decrease of Ojas ist: afte are aycearereiten sare fat: fasifa gaat aisfevt carafe cafrafeaa: Gro Saar Bait sedans Teeny shastratsereicareareds Sst Ojas undergoes decrease in quantity by anger, hunger (starvation), worry, grief, exertion etc., Symptoms of Ojas decrease — The person becomes fretful, debilitated, repeatedly worries without any reason, feels discomfort in sense organs, develops bad complexion, negative thoughts and dryness; Treatment — Use of drugs of Jivaniya group (Enlivening) (mentioned in chapter 15) milk, meat juice etc. 39 — 40. Notes :- Many more causes of decrease of Ojas have been mentioned in other texts of Ayurdeva, they are Ativyayama - too much exercise Anashana — fasting for long periods of time Alpasana - eating less quantities of food Rooksapana (intake of alcoholic beverages which cause dryness), Pramitasana (intake of mixture of good and bad foods), Bhaya (fear), Prajagara (waking up at night), Abhighata (injury), Abhishanga (assault by evil spirits; micro organisms like bacteria, virus etc.), Dhatukshaya (depletion of tissues such as by haemorrhage etc.), Ativisarga (too much of elimination) of Kapha, Sonita (blood), Sukra (semen) and Mala (waste products); Visha (ingestion of poison) Increase of Ojas aisigel fe cera aPeuterates: Increase of Ojas makes for contentment, nourishment of the body and increase of strength. 41. Page No. 157 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan aerst aaite waft weaetes FT actor, waive ot ct giearat sey The increase of Doshas should be controlled by avoidance of foods which are disliked. The decrease of Doshas should be managed by foods indulgence of food that are desired. 42. aaa fe oft ater fragrant: Ger: etones AS oes A The Doshas which have undergone increase and decrease generally produce desire for foods which are dissimilar and similar (in properties to those of the Doshas) respectively; but the unintelligent person do not recognize them. 43. aust Tad 7 ast Fal faarad SOHC, Seles ato, HT: Fa He Hac The Doshas, when increased produce their respective features (signs and symptoms) depending upon their strength; when decreased they do not produce signs and symptoms and when normal, they attend to their normal functions. 44. a Ua ages Gat faged a va ater favar aera | ueareded fered arnefagefea weroftan: | ¥4 Il The very same Doshas, which when normal, are the causes for growth of the body, become the causes for its destruction when abnormal. Hence by adopting suitable measures, the body should be protected from their decrease and increase 45. Thus ends the chapter called Doshadi Vijnaneeya Adhyaya. Page No. 158 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 12 Doshabhediya a@sadq - Dosha Types, Imbalance Symptoms 12th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana describes about location of Tridosha in the body, classification and functions of each type of Tridosha, causes for its increase or decrease etc. It is called as Doshabhediya Adhyaya. Place of Tridosha — Doshasthana Place of Vata Dosha - Uerarerren cha fee aa rearea ea er eae aaAea aay cerareney fasta: Pakavasaya — large intestine, Kati — waist Sakthi — hip Shrotra — ear Asthi— bones Sparshanendriya — skin Special space — large intestine 1 Place of Pitta Dosha - amPaNTAeea:eaet Tat VA Ta: eeeata o Peaes afara faery: Nadhi — Umbilicus, Amashaya- stomach and small intestine, Sweda — sweat, Lasika- lymph, Rudhira — blood, Rasa- plasma, Druk — eye, and Sparshanam — skin, Special seat — Nabhi- region around the Umbilicus. 2 Place of Kapha - Bt: HUSA: FoilAgai sraeray Ta: Aero ug Hea wo Hpea, URI: Ura — Chest , Kantha — throat , Page No. 159 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Shira — head, Kloma — Pancreas?, Parvani — bone joints, Amashaya,- Stomach and small intestine, Rasa —plasma, Meda — fat Ghrana — nose and Jihva — tongue are the seats of Kapha, Special seat — Ura — chest. 3 5 types of Vata - WOTesarcISaTCAM aT: Vata is of 5 types. Prana Vata, Udana Vata, Vyana Vata, Samana Vata and Apana Vata, Prana Vata — RX: HN seecdtiegardedyy SslacteraycsINeT: MAA ATA hT Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Prana is located in the head and moves in the chest, throat. It regulates will, heart, sense organs, intellect and vision. It is the cause for expectoration, sneezing, belching, inspiration and swallowing of food. 4 Udana Vata — BE: CMAATACT ATCA TAAL ang iecnacaatar area raise: The chest is the seat of Udana, it moves in the nose, umbilicus and throat; its functions are initiation of speech (vak), effort (Prayatna), enthusiasm (Urja), strength (bala) , color, complexion (varna) and memory (smruti) 5 Page No. 160 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vyana Vata — cae Bead: HeeAceIN Aglaia: TATA TON CAT AAG ASOT AT: ora: wal: fearcateaet wider: aiRomy Vyana is located in the heart, moves all over the body in great speed, It attends to functions such as flexion and extension (locomotor action) opening and closing of the eyelids etc. Generally all the body activities are regulated by Vyana Vata. 6-7 Samana Vata — ara aisreoes: wsd aa Ada: sea Teeter Tafa fadaata aster Samana Vata is located near the digestive fire. It moves in the Kostha — alimentary tract, It receives the food into stomach, aids in digestion, helps in dividing the food into useful part and waste part, and moves these parts in their normal paths. 8 Apana Vata — HUA setae: sMrafeaereairay: Opa ape A TS fer HAUT: Apana Vata is located in the Apana — large intestine, moves in the waist, bladder, genitals. It attends to the functions such as ejaculation, menstruation, defecation, urination and child birth. 9 Five types of Pitta- Red was Pitta is of 5 types. Pachaka Pitta Ranjaka Pitta Sadhaka Pitta Alochaka Pitta Bhrajaka Pitta Page No. 161 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pachaka Pitta — Oe Tea, asad HY accented card aed Trefgeasion Heroreniegaat Gaetest fasta aaNet Gere TUT crea ect Vea Te alia Ielelelet Wh AT Ace It is located between large intestine and stomach. (between Amashaya and pakvashaya) It is composed of all the five basic elements (Panchamaha Bhuta), it is predominant with fire element and devoid of water element. It is called by the term Anala- fire because of its function of Paka — digestion and transformation of food materials. It cooks the food, divides it into essence and waste, It bestows grace and influence on other types of Pitta. Hence, among all the types of Pitta, Pachaka pitta is the dominant one. Ranjaka Pitta — sma ect Wath TARSAL The pitta located in the Amasaya- stomach is known as Ranjaka. It converts the useful part of the digestion into blood. Hence it converts Rasa Dhatu into Rakta Dhatu. 12 Sadhaka Pitta — qereniarcaed: seraekarsend The pitta located in the Hrudaya —heart is known as Sadhaka. It attends to mental functions such as knowledge, intelligence, self- consciousness, etc, thereby helping the purpose — aims of life. 13 1/3 Alochaka Pitta — TaerATerTh It is located in the eyes. It helps in vision. Page No. 162 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Bhrajaka Pitta — career It resides in skin and helps exhibition of color and complexions. 14 Types of Kapha - geasaT J ISTE Kapha also is of five types; Avalambaka Kapha — at: Fa: F Rest cadeta: SCAM CAM AED AEM VATA HHA T MOT AcicAaaesaA Hal HaaeaH: LaASAT It is located in the chest and Trika pradesha — the meeting place of shoulder, neck and back;. By its innate strength and by the power of essence of food, it does lubrication, nourishing etc functions that are attributed to water element. It also influences the functioning of other types of Kapha. 15 Kledaka Kapha - wearers Wea: Flan: UT HeoAsa rahe Located in the Amasaya — stomach. It moistens the hard food mass and helps in digestion. Bodhaka Kapha — Waster alert Taareareit It is located in the tongue. It helps in taste perception. Page No. 163 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Tarpaka Kapha - ate: It is ocated in the head. It nourishes sense organs. Shleshaka Kapha — acres: sears era: It is located in the bone joints. It lubricates and strengthens the joint. gia WAT aero Ea arpacAATA Saray stefacHarsr a qurqa Though Tridosha is present all over the body, they are more dominant in specific areas of the body, as explained above. Qualities that influence increase and decrease of Tridosha — Note: In the description given below, Chaya means — first level increase of Dosha in their own place. Kopa / Prakopa - means increase and overflow of Doshas from its own place to other place. It has the potential to cause the disease. Shama / Prashama - means decrease of increased Dosha and restoration of health. Qualities that cause Chaya, Kopa and Shama of Vata — SMT TFA VATA ar: pater waa attr arate eat Eteeea AUT: Hot along with dryness, movement, etc causes Vata Chaya. Coldness along with dryness causes Kopa. Snigdha (oilyness, unctuousness) and other qualities- Guru (heavy), Usna (hot) , pichila (stickiness), sthira (stability) etc. associated with hotness bring about its Shamana of Vata. 19 Qualities that cause Chaya, Kopa and Shama of Pitta - ahaa aera: eonear: wet fiers Hae sls AM, Arce: wa eiaraiear: Page No. 164 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Teekshna (piercing, strong) and other qualities- dryness, lightness, etc associated with cold cause Chaya- mild increase of Pitta, The above qualities associated with hot, cause Kopa — profound increase of Pitta. Manda (viscous, mild) and other qualities like stickyness, stability etc, associated with cold bring about Pitta Shama- reduction back to normal. 20 Qualities that cause Chaya, Kopa and Shama of Pitta - ahaa gear: fareerea: Had QaASHUIUTAL Slt HT, deta TUT WaNSa: TA Snigdha —(unctuous, oily) and others —heaviness, stickiness, mild, etc along with cold quality causes Kapha chaya. (mild increase) Same Snigdha — unctuous, oily etc qualities associated with Usna — hot cause Kapha Kopa Manda- dull and others- rough, dry, clarity, movement, lightness associated with cold quality bring about Kapha Shama- reduction to normal. 21 Overall, Vata Dosha - Ushna (hot) + Ruksha (dryness) and associated qualities cause Vata Chaya Sheeta (cold) + Ruksha (dryness) and associated qualities cause Vata Kopa Ushna (hot) + Snigdha (unctuous, oily) and associated qualities cause Vata shama. Pitta Dosha Sheeta (cold) + Teekshna (piercing, strong) etc qualities cause Pitta Chaya Ushna (hot) + Teekshna (piercing, strong) etc qualities cause Pitta Kopa Sheeta (cold) + Manda (mild, dull) cause Pitta Shama. Kapha Dosha - Sheeta (Cold) + Snigdha (unctuous, oily) cause Kapha Chaya Ushna (hot) + Snigdha (unctuous, oily) cause Kapha Kopa Ushna (hot) + Rooksha (dryness) cause Kapha Shama Levels of Dosha Increase and Decrease Chaya wat gfe: camreeta yedst qeeay 2 faata qresr a Chaya means slight increase of Dosha in its own place. It produces dislike against the things that would cause further increase of particular Dosha. It is a self defense mechanism of the body to avoid further increase of Dosha, which may lead to disease. 22 Page No. 165 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kopa ated searereniata fesarat avet Tauarareed Were: Kopa — suggests further increase of Dosha and overflow of increased Dosha into other body channels. It causes appearance of symptoms of increased Dosha, leading to onset of disease process. The premonitory symptoms of the disease can be observed at this stage. Sama Fae ALA AAT Tannese: TA: Sama means normalcy. Restoration / decrease of increased Dosha to its normal levels. Fluctuation of Dosha in different seasons — TTI aTaaSTey AY asiiey ¢ Tccea, eersat: RrRNTey Dosha Chaya Prakopa Prasama Vata Grisma (summer) Varsha (rainy) ‘Sharat (Autumn) Pitta \Varsha (rainy) Sharat (Autumn) Hemanta (early winter) Kapha Shishira (winter) ‘Vasanta (spring) Grishma (summer) cefarrdeladt eg areeahwated Heat HREAAT TATTLE AEM Red aie wa att a g area ea: dradRaregtarsrecatsraray: ap: Fea HTT Hel OS T Theta VETS Vata undergoes chaya (mild increase) during summer by the use of Plants possessing such as lightness, dryness etc. It is especially so, in the bodies of persons possessing such qualities. But during summer, Vata does not undergo profound increase due to the heat of the summer. (Remember, cold is a quality of vata). Hot is opposite to Vata, hence there is no increase by a large extent. Similarly, Pitta undergoes chaya in rainy season, because of production of Amla viplaka (sour taste at the end of digestion) of water and foods. But it does not undergo further increase in rainy season, because of coldness. (Remember, hot is the quality of Pitta) Coldness checks further increase of Pitta in rainy season. Page No. 166 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kapha undergoes Chaya in winter by the use of foods with cold and oily qualiies. But it does not undergo prakopa because Kapha becomes solidified due to severe cold of the winter 25-27 Sit Plea HAATER SAM yeT: Ware Aird Heat HT art: pret HTT at a So, activities and food habits can cause increase or decrease of Dosha. At the same time, seasonal effect also may cause Dosha increase or decrease. 28 Action of increased Dhosha — SATAN TEM ATA AAAS fafa ¢ Hat aol sectet sretrad When there is a flood, the water gushes into the cities very fast, but the reversal process is very slow. Similarly, the increased Doshas spread throughout body from foot to head to produce diseases but the decrease of Dosha and restoration of normalcy takes a very long time. 29 Dosha is the main cause for disease — ast va fe aasr Merona war oe oa Ada: Wag: Saas ace wat at peestaraa: faarond fafeet ate, qonesnicacia car raurqdsrataarcaan waar CORI BE ICALICS Like a bird flying high in the sky cannot escape from its shadow, the root cause for disease lies in Tridosha. Even the mental qualities such as Satva, Raja and Tama are influenced by Tridosha. Dosha get vitiated, then cause vitiation of body tissues (Dhatu) and waste products (Mala) to cause disease. 32-34 % Three kinds of causes for Dosha increase - oer FT _ ARO we: srerced: Sater: art: Ha: T SPA The causes of Dosha increase can be categorized as - Less involvement (heena yoga), - Wrong involvement (Mithya yoga) - Over involvement (Atiyoga) Page No. 167 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan of Artha — sense organs Kala — season Karma — action . So, less, wrongful or more involvement of sense organs / seasons / action leads to Dosha imbalance. It is explained further. Artha — Senses and their correlation:- Set sla sfemaes seu: Bart: Caer aa a afcatat sifceerct: gee sreasiary Hoes siege fates frpare a qearondeac wy Aaa: A Aer: VATA Tear SATA facut Hinayoga — Poor association of sense organs — insufficient, inadequate, contact or non- contact with the objects of senses- sound, touch, sight, taste and smell with their respective sense organs. For example, not at all hearing to sounds, or living in a low lit area etc Atiyoga is over indulgence. Seeing objects which are very minute, bright etc, gazing for a very long time, hearing to loud music ete. Mithya Yoga — wrong indulgence with sense organs — seeing / hearing frightening, very close, very far, disliked and abnormal objects etc. 36-38 Kala — seasons:- areted efictsorasisieafeaen aa: a et aereftarte: srfaarar arfacrawr: fAearired fatesel faatracacerr: Kala is of three kinds, cold, hot and rainy. Hinayoga of the Kala is — less cold in winter, less temperature in summer and less rain in rainy season. Atiyoga is — more rain in rainy season, more temperature in summer etc. Mithyayoga is manifestation of qualities opposites of the natural ones of the season. Example — rain during summer, cold weather during summer etc. 38 2 39 Page No. 168 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Karma: Activities:- aMaededtead Hare asafere4r PRAHA Sle WA fectelona aw: sean sifagieded aareoreneorey TasasaipaRertaa ean SINT UAE Wea T wat wrofeurante aren sea ferf fava: TaeA sKaas a A aT HAA Three types of actions pertaining to mind, body and speech lead to Dosha imbalance. Heenayoga — very less speaking, very little physical activity, very less thought process. Atiyoga — excessive speaking, excess physical activity and excessive thinking. Mithyayoga — wrong speaking, wrong physical activities and wrong, evil thinking, suppression of natural urges, improper postures, abrupt jumping and falling, speaking — too much immediately after meals , harboring of desires- attachment, passion, hatred, fear etc. 40-42 4 patect fafaenet careftey eran Poe aa ey These are the causes for increase of Doshas, thus increased they produce many kinds of diseases, involving the mind, tissues, viscera, bones and joints. 43-44 Pathways of diseases - Rogamargas:- The body is divided into three sections to explain different diseases. Antarogamarga — internal path — refers to gastro intestinal tract. Bahi roga marga — external path — refers to Rakta, Mamsa etc Dhatu (tissues) and skin. Madhyama rogamarga — it includes vital organs such as brain, heart, blood vessels, joints, nerves etc. This concept is explained below in detail. Bahi Koshta / Bahi roga marga — External pathway - Wal Teas: cds T TEAM WE Ac yy TAA AVS TTS ASATATAT: afesieres gataaereitereay seq: vs Page No. 169 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Raktha- blood and others tissues (Blood, muscles, bone, fat, bone marrow and sex related secretions) and skin continue the Bahya Rogamarga — external pathway of disease. It is related with diseases such as moles, discolored patches on face, Gandalaji- goiter, glandular ulcer on the face, malignant tumors, hemorrhoids, abdominal tumor, swelling and other external diseases. 44 14 -45 Anta Koshta / Anta Rogamarga — Internal path — Hed: BISol Agree HATA: Aa EMM: THCAAARATALATH LSAT: secsttat a eitmreitereacre sia fer Amashaya — stomach and small intestine, Pakwashaya — large intestine The above two, along with the entire gastro intestinal tract is called as Mahasrota. (The big channel). This constitutes the Anta Koshta. Diseases which affect this path are — vomiting, diarrhea, cough, dyspnoea, enlargement of the abdomen, fever, dropsy, hemorrhoids, abdominal tumors, Visarpa (herpes), abscess etc. 46 Madhyama Koshta / Madhyama Rogamarga — The middle path RNigquaccmenAwaeea T aes: Aietdat: RAAGHUICART ALTA: deat: Rerareas weaseraenigar: Ruler: Tevatearraneragred: The head, heart, urinary bladder and such other vital organs, joints of bones, blood vessels, tendons, ligaments, nerves constitute the madhyama rogamarga. From it arise, consumption , hemiplegia, facial paralysis, diseases of the head and other organs, pain, stiffness- loss of movement of the joints, bones, waist etc. 47-48 Different symptoms produced by increased Dosha - Symptoms of Vata increase: PACAACATLATT TGS YS SFUTTEST ae eae EaI sea Go FaFH: PIAL FUT: Vaal steak 31S a wparier aray: Page No. 170 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sramsa — Ptosis- drooping down Vyasa — dilation Vyadha — cutting pain Swapa — loss of sensation Sada — weakness, loss of function Ruk — pain Toda — continuous pain Bhedanam -— splitting pain Sanga — Constriction, Angabhanga — bodyache, Sankocha — shrinking of the organ, reduction in size Varta — twisting, Harshana — tingling sensation Tarshana — thirst Kampa — tremors Parushya — roughness Saushirya — feeling of empty Shosha — dryness Spandana — pulsating Veshtana — rigidity, as if tied Sthambha — stiffness Kashaya rasata — astringent taste in mouth Aruna, Shyava Varna - appearance of blue or crimson discoloration - these are the abnormal signs and symptoms of increased Vayu —Vata. 49-50 Symptoms of Pitta increase — Packer arewaisaarferct: Fae: wea: Efe: He: Fast Fecal we: agarel tat aot: cregecratsta: Daha — burning sensation Raga — reddish discoloration Ushmapakita — heat, increase in temperature, formation of pus, ulcers Sveda — sweating Kleda — inflammation with wetness, moistness Sruti — inflammation with pus / oozing / secretions, exudation Kotha — putrefaction- decomposition Sadana — debility Murchana — fainting Mada — toxicity Katuka Amla Rasa - bitter and sour taste in the mouth Pandu Aruna Varjitaha - appearance of color other than yellowish white and crimson. 51- 52 4 Page No. 171 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Symptoms of Kapha increase — wT: TgaorTHvgetacaatay THEN TAIT SA HAMA eal era: ah: edt tat cargeracit faxarftar Sneha — unctuousness, oilyness Kathinya — hardness Kandu — itching Sheetatva — coldness Gaurava — heavyness Bandha — obstruction, Upalepa — coating, as if tied with a wet cloth Staimitya — stiffness, loss of movement Shopha — inflammation Apakti— indigestion, Atinidrata — excessive sleep Shveta varna — white discolouration Svadu lavana rasa — sweet, salt taste in mouth Chirakarita — delay in all activities. 52 ' -53. SANTA Aged STAAL ater ais rea TAT TT, AAACN ATA: TAeeMAeL TTT Thus are enumerated, the features, which appear in diseases, are to be recognized by the physician through inspection and others — methods of examination of patient. 54 Importance of patient observation: To gain the knowledge of the different stages of disease the physician should observe the patient every minute.55 TeIaTead eke: Hafafercneht Toedadowa 7 weed aaa Knowledge of successful treatment is obtained from constant practice just as knowledge of determining the quality of gems is obtained only from- knowing the science. 56 Three kinds of diseases based on cause — Trividha roga- TSN: HITCH ACTA ST: ASTRA caera Few aa: Page No. 172 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Diseases are of three kinds viz, Karmaja Vyadhi — Includes Diseases that originate due to bad deeds of the past lives, or of present life or of both past and present lives. Usually the cause for such disease is not clearly known. 57 Doshaja Vyadhi — aenfereret asia: aatalt Sqeiiaen AGRE Hea SaaasaHl alyepast: Diseases which arise from the specific causes, which lead to Dosha increase and then to disease manifestation. Doshakarmaja — combination of bad deeds and indulgence in causes of disease result in disease. Usually the symptoms are profound in this case. 58 Treatment for such diseases: facaritoncya: wast: HAAS EAL TES PAACA FT SHAT ATCT TL The Doshaja diseases get cured from indulgence in food, activities and medicine that have opposite qualities to the cause. Karmaja diseases get cured after the termination of the effects of such acts of previous / current lives. Dosha-Karmaja diseases get cured after the mitigation of Dosha and nullifying of effects of past deeds. 59 Two kinds of diseases — based on cause — Dvividha roga— AIM CANA ACHAEA: Fete LAE YaoT: TESTA, SMe: TVaTgGIEaT: 1. Svatantra Roga FUASATAAT: Faaea: FAST AAT: fanttaedat 3a J Svatantra Roga — independent/ primary — have their own specific causes, comforting methods and clearly manifest features. Page No. 173 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 2. Paratantra Roga — secondary diseases, associated diseases. Those which do not have their own specific cause. It is further of two types. Purvaja — premonitory symptoms — the symptoms that are seen at the initial stage of a disease Upadrava — complications of diseases. 60- 61 facaed Aonerit aemarcatear pater, visa ANT Wea UAAT HeMFAAEAAT waeaheae et aT Taare TAI careiteorseentnes atsteragy fF a: The secondary disease (Paratantra Roga) usually subsides when the primary diseases is treated. If they do not get subsided then, treatment has to be given- for the secondary diseases as well. If powerful, secondary affections should be treated soon because these- complication cause more troublers to the body which is already debilitated by the primary disease. 62-63 fan aT Hep at fe farera Haret | ae aafaernron aac set Gar eae: evil The physician should never feel shy for not knowing the nomenclature of the disease, for there is no rule/ custom/ state, that every disease has a name. 64 a va gat ae: wararafadya: SMTA WT WC FaHRTeL Hed FeeT TEATS PRAP AS START I qatar sqfavsiea efrpaigusnay The very same Doshas, depending upon the nature of the causative factors, travels to many parts of the body and produces many disease, hence treatment of the disease, its abode- site should be judged very quickly with the help of knowledge of the disease. 65-66 Factors to observe in patient - Heed AES AAT HEN HAUT yafFaeM: eo en yea: Tatetst are sitver ferwacr Oy ada Patcarant + 8 Race sara &¢ Page No. 174 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The physician should minutely examine and determine, Dushya — the Dhatus and Malas involved in a diseases Desha — the area of the body where disease is manifested, the living place of the patient Bala — strength of the patient Kala- season, how old is the disease, age of the person etc. Anala- digestive power of the patient Prakriti- Body constitution, Vayas- age of the patient and disease, Satva- mind, tolerance capacity of the patient Satmya- The food and activities to which the patient is accustomed to. Ahara- food habits and Avastha- stages of the diseases The physician should watch for above factors to decide and then only, the physician should decide on the aggravated Dosha and its appropriate treatment. Such a doctor will never commit mistakes in treatment. 67-68 TACT Aecaes ToT EWU HUAN aeAeaaea srt The symptoms may be affected by the disease and also by the mental status of the patient. The strength of the disease varies based on strength and weakness of the mind and body of the patient. Hence the physician should be very attentive. 69. we agai cat wewled frsega: sevatsrncara set fanfaqad The unintelligent physician, who determines a grievous disease as a mild one, goes wrong in treatment because of under estimating the condition the Dosha. 70 ae sorerords at apeceret welfsrcrey SeRAcAT Weel Healer aT: ger cafaatte autre fare feet Actes Hae TEA He will administer drugs/ therapies in small doses. Such mild treatment causes worsening of the disease because of ineffective treatment. On the other hand, if the person over estimates the strength of the disease and over treats with Panchakarma and oral medicines, it will also trouble the health of the patient to a very great extent. 71-72 seh aged: Bed Aaarcires waar aT Boot AVSTANAT BA Tay Hence the physician should constantly study the science, determine the exact condition of all factors, all the time and then administer appropriate medicines and treatments. 73 Page No. 175 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Number of combination of Dosha — Dosha Samyoga samkhya — weed Hat: W er Geaatasted: que ae gfe deifeaen, aa J cea Hera Ta Faker, Heat THE WAAY VE qataicetast J Ua demir: Ve T aNARaeHe re, usafdetacdd ga: aftter aad: The number of combinations of Dosha increase and decrease are 62. In their vriddhi they are - 3 individually, in the combination of two doshas they are 3, and 9 in total- 3 in equal proportion of increase, 6 with preponderance of one dosha; they are 13 in combination of all three together - 6 with preponderance of any one dosha, | with equal preponderance of all the three, 6 by disproportionate subdivisions; Thus in respect of vriddhi they are 25; Similarly in respect of kshaya they are 25. whangigaraant: 9e a yas ye Upenicdecagen afar st a In the combination of increase, normal and decrease of one dosha each will make up for 6 numbers Again they are 6 in the combination of decrease of | dosha and increase of 2 doshas Har afastsef T: PIGSC: CAESAR, The number of combinations of Dosha increase and decrease are 62. The 63" is the condition, where all the Doshas are in equilibrium, which is called as the state of health. 78 Tages aI atsied aaranfagheye: T © Metecsa NATTA eet Setareaeaaresay TAET With the association of Rasa, Rakta etc and the level of increase or decrease of Doshas, there can be innumerable permutations and combinations. The physician should understand them by their features — signs and symptoms with an attentive mind.79 Thus ends the chapter known as Dosabhediya Adhyaya. 12" of Sutrasthana of Ashtanga Hridayam. Page No. 176 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 13 Doshopakramaniyam asa - Treatment of Dosha Imbalance and AAma In this chapter we are learning the treatment options for Dosha imbalance, how Tridosha reach with Ama and produce symptoms, what is the line of treatment for this condition. We also learn about time of administration of medicines based on disease. It is the 13th chapter of Sutrasthana of Ashtanga Hrudaya, called as Doshopakramaneeya Adhyaya. Treatment for Vata imbalance (increase) — Vriddha Vata chikitsa— TAA: TS Fae: AMT AG FACFATAUSOT GS STATS HAS ACoA ¢ aweat Tee Vat Hee Mewaitsay fread staat: qaelierar 2 Qret: reel: Ret: FASIea: Hetwarera: favercaee ae dora 3 Treatment options for increased Vata Dosha are- Sneha — oleation-oral administration of oil / ghee / fat and external oil massage Sveda — Sudation — diaphoresis, sweating therapy Mrudu Samshodhana — Mild purification procedure, Mild Panchakarma (Vamana and Virechana). Excess of Panchakarma might lead to Vata increase. Svadu Amla Lavana Ushna Bhojya — foods which are of sweet, sour and salt taste; Abhyanga — Oil massage Mardana — simple massage Veshtana — wrapping / covering the body/ organ with cloth Trasana — Threatening, frightening Seka — pouring of herbal decoctions / oils on the affected part Paishtika Goudika Madya — wine prepared from corn flour and jaggery- molasses Snigdha Ushna Basti — enema therapy with fat-oil, enema with drugs of hot potency Sukhasheelata — comforting the patient Deepana Pachana Siddha Sneha — medicated fats of different kinds- sources prepared with drugs causing increase of hunger and improving digestion; Medya Pishita Taila Anuvasana — oleation enema prepared from juice of fatty meat and oil- 1-3 Treatment for Pitta imbalance (increase) — Vriddha Pitta Chikitsa faccer afas: oer cargettct: Fatal Fag irraKaaiey sirotefer sister Ty Pease TMA TAIAA 5 Page No. 177 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan yerseacaar: Gber erik after feat arfere: « TIS Ar Ga: afearerasTarH Brarafda ant: fra: efrer fasyitar: arareqeReeoT aeTOT SqeTet Atel: aed faqe eacoatoronera tad ¢ Aesitstote ied Hae FAH BM ara: Ga: afifarned fasts: ¢ Treatment options for increased Pitta Dosha are — Sarpi paana — drinking of Ghrita (clarified Butter). It can be plain or medicated, based on physician’s advice. Svadu, sheeta Virechana — purgation therapy with drugs of sweet taste and cold potency, Intake of foods and drugs having sweet, bitter and astringent tastes. Inhaling of fumes from herbs that are coolant, pleasant and cordial Anointing the body with camphor, sandalwood paste, Vetiver paste, very frequently. Residing on terraces lit by moonlight in the evenings, enjoying pleasant music and soft cold breeze, company of friends who do not restrain him, of sons who speak cordially and with innocence. Spending time with wife, who is obedient, pleasing and virtuous; Residing in houses equipped with fountains emitting cooled water, parks and ponds, Spending time in houses near water reservoirs having clean water, sand, lotus, flowers, and trees, with a calm mind; Consuming milk, ghee and Purgation therapy (Virechana) Treatment for Kapha imbalance (increase) — Vriddha Kapha Chikitsa gersAuT fate art Aer ara La Heat TaTeudeuisot HeftaaHMAhA vo dearattad aed cesifa: wore: HAPS CHATA: Fara Bat aca ¢e faetste aaet as: aig Acrectatserey qarcanrmgs fereacd BUTT A kz Treatment options for increased Kapha Dosha are- Vidhiyukta Teekshna Vamana Virechana — Strong emesis and purgation in accordance with prescribed procedure, Consuming food which are dry, Consuming food in limited quantity Consuming food that have Teekshna (strong, piercive), Ushna (hot), pungent, bitter and astringent taste, Old wine Sexual activity Page No. 178 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan keeping awake at night, Exercises of different kinds, Worry, Dry massage of the body; Vamana — emesis therapy, drinking of soups- of grains Use of honey, Therapies and medicines that reduce fat, Inhalation of medicinal smoke, Fasting, Gargling Facing difficulties 10-12 STA: Yara At seaaeer Hifcta: eaeaTAy Tt Tard fewer The different treatment prescribed for each Dosha individually, may be combined appropriately in conditions of combinations of two or three Doshas. 13 ava: wrt aefered anied HHA | Feat aerafecata, HHA J aE: evil Generally the treatment for the combination of Vata and Pitta is similar to the regimen of summer- described in Chapter 3. For Kapha and Vata combination treatment, it is similar to the regimen of Vasanta- spring because Maruta- Vata is Yogavahi; Yogavahi means, Vata, when associated with Pitta, boosts Pitta Dosha, when it is associated with Kapha, it boosts Kapha Dosha. For the combination of Kapha and Pitta the treatment shall be similar to the regimen of Sarad- Autum .14 weary aera rears sifaera: ei The Doshas should be treated properly when there are in Chaya stage (mild increase) only. In their stage of Kopa (Dosha enhanced imbalance), they should be vanquished without opposing / interfering with one another Dosha. When there is simultaneous enhanced increase (Kopa) of all the three Doshas, the most powerful / most aggravated Dosha should controlled first, without opposing the remaining Doshas. 15 wart: weteaiare at seamed, at 3rat fare: qeed weeat a ard That treatment which cures one disease and gives rise to another disease- sooner or later, is not Shuddha- pure/ good/appropriate; A pure treatment is that which cures one — diseases and does not give rise to another. 16 Page No. 179 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Movement of Dosha from Digestive Tract to Body Tissues and vice versa — TATA SSA: ava sfsarearona hy PROTCSEMIAA GACT T Movement from Koshta to Shakha - By the effect of exercise, increase of heat, unsuitable/unhealthy activities and due to quick movement of Vata, the increased Doshas move out of the Kostha (gastrointestinal tract) to the Shakhas- tissues, Asthi — bones and Marmas- vital organs and vulnerable points. FRA HAA ATH AS AAT ferTeT TASMLT FIAT AT SACHA: a arenfeded astar pated eITAASay Movement from Shakha to Koshta - Doshas move from body channels and tissues to the gastro intestinal tract, by the effect of purification, clearing and widening of the minute body channels. By further increase of Doshas, By liquefaction, By maturity, By Balancing and controlling Vata. When Doshas move from one place to other, they remain there for some time, waiting for an exciting factor. After deriving strength by season, time etc, they get further aggravated and move to other places as well. 17-19 Native and foreign Doshas:- Sthayi- and Agantu Doshas:- TAT TUMTAEAY araataery J puifeatcaay Tad seeneaeeniag, Treatment should be done- especially on priority to that Dosha which has travelled into the seats of other Doshas and which is weak, Priority should also be given to that Dosha which, by its own strength overcomes other Doshas. Agantu Dosha — Bled UAT Safer UipPea aT Foreign Dosha, should be treated either after treating the Sthanika (native Dosha) or even otherwise. The choice of Dosha, to be treated first depends on the level of aggravation and strength of Doshas. 20 Page No. 180 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Triyak gata Dosha - wafers ater: Fereae aR T Ty paiet AY cata ceriseraefad rary wate WaT Ae aT HSA TT Wea PoMIeaAT Bardot fafererte Usually, the Triyaggata Doshas — which are not localized in the gastrointestinal tract but localized in the tissues, cause troubles to the patient for a long time; they should not be treated in haste. They should be carefully treated only afterdetermining the strength of the body and digestive activity. They should be mitigated with stipulated palliative treatment or they should be brought into the alimentary tract and then they should be expelled out by the nearby route (either by mouth — by emeisis — Vamana or by anal route, by purgation — Virechana). 21-22 Effects of Doshas associated with Ama - SamaDosha Lakshana - Bane gers aa srferor AeA: HME AeASSAA AAS ATS EAA: fesat Hele aren, faaron faa: When imbalanced Doshas get associated with Ama (a factor of indigestion / false metabolism), it is called as Saama Dosha. (Sa aama Dosha, Sa means ‘with’). The features that are seen due to Sama Dosha are - Srotorodha - Obstruction of the channels, pores Balabhramsha — loss of strength, Gaurava — feeling of heaviness of the body, Anila Moodata — inactivity of Anila-vata, Alasya — laziness, lassitude, Apakti— loss of digestive power, Nishteeva — Person spits saliva frequently, more of expectoration, Malasanga — constipation or low frequency of urination leading to accumulation of wastes Aruchi — anorexia, Klama — exhaustion The opposites of the above symptoms are of the Nirama Doshas —Doshas not mixed up with the Ama. (undigested materials) 23-24 Origin of Ama — Amotpatti- PA Holsecdea MGAe sahara Soon after digestion process, the useful part gets separated from the waste. The useful, nutrition tich part is called as Rasa dhatu. Page No. 181 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Due to lack of digestion strength, The Rasa Dhatu does not form well, it remains in raw, weak form. It gets vitiated, it stays in the Amashaya (stomach and intestines) itself, and becomes ‘Ama’. 25 sed eee valageesa seaiea Heder HASAN FAVEAs aAqeeMAEA AFT Other authors opine that Ama gets formed from intimate mixing with one another of greatly increased Doshas. 26 aa foretea HA det AEYFA aI SSaeT GIT: aT scqaeeted Fa Wareag ear: The Doshas and Dusyas (the Dhatus and Malas) which get mixed with this Ama are designated as Sama — mixed with Ama; The diseases originating from this Saama dosha are called as Saama Vyadhi. 27 Saama Dosha chikitsa—treatment of Sama Doshas :- Hace Waza STATE, areal at fret Mellel MAY Helferelsele] Hole Agefera sraraer fe are ot Ey: Getter: The Sama Doshas which are spread all over the body, which are lurking in the Dhatus and which are not moving out of their places of accumulation, should not be forced out by purification Panchakarma therapies like emesis, purgations etc. Just as attempts of extracting juice from an unripe fruit leads to destruction, the dwelling place itself will get destroyed if Doshas are tried to expel out along with Ama. 28 Right approach in Sama Dosha treatment - Sama Doshas should be treated qrectattet: Fereece SadeT oR PAT erat eter: Bret AAAs AAT - first with drugs which are digestive and which increase hunger; - next with oleation and sudation therapies (Snehana, Svedana) and - finally they should be expelled out with Shodhana therapies- emesis, purgation at the proper time, and in accordance with the strength of the patient. 29 Sra aad AFA ACTATATA ATL Ubi Hedaya Traerenegeat a Page No. 182 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Drugs administered through the mouth, bring out the Malas- Doshas from the Amasaya- stomach and small intestines; Drugs administered through the nose bring out the Doshas from the parts above the shoulders and Drugs administered through the rectum bring out the Doshas from the Pakvasaya — large intestine. 30 Siereaveay Sed a a Weed: TATA erdctudiefarey faeyareect fe terer: Saama Doshas which are greatly increased and going out of the body on their own accord, either in the upward or downward routes- vomiting and purging respectively should not be stopped by medicines, for they produce diseases, if they are stopped. 31 Accel Mara arorey sat Teearieet: fasatet Weeteded: wreadfesteta aT Such Doshas which are going out should be ignored in the early stage and the patient should be given suitable foods- light food; Next in the second stage they should be cooked with digestive drugs or removed out by purification (Panchakarma) therapies. 32 Time for eliminating Dosha out of the body - aracy apifdes a ATA BTM HAT 33 Herasiisantercel aearetel se fever Vata which undergoes mild increase (Chaya) in Greeshma (summer) should be removed from the body (by basti- enema) in Shravana masa (August) Pitta which undergoes mild increase in Varsha (rainy season), should be expelled out of the body in kartika Month (by Virechana — purgation) Kapha which undergoes mild increase in Shishira (winter) should be expelled out in Chaitra month (April) by Vamana. 33 sepratetian fe atsrastigersren: Beet AMY AM |Serel |r] Fareitererey Greeshma, Varsa and Hemanta [summer, rainy season and winter]- have too much of heat, rain and cold respectively; in the period in between these, known as Sadharana Kala; the Doshas should be cleared out. 34 peat eteteorgeetat weitere Tarr WarsaicHar wed farepte at STA After having overcome the effects of cold, hot and rainy seasons suitably- by adopting appropriate protective methods necessary treatment — therapies should be administered; Page No. 183 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The Kriyakala- period of abnormal activity, stages of disease evolution should not be allowed to progress- further. 36 Aushadha Sevana Kala — time of administration of medicines:- Besaertea Hest ACY Hed Haeat me me ag a t ares fre ctverey 3y Medicines should be administered, 1. ananna— on empty / when there is no food- in the stomach ; 2. annadau — just before food or at the beginning of food intake, 3. anna madhye — during / in between food intake 4. anna ante — at the end of food intake. 5. kavalantare — in between morsels 6. grase grase — with each morsel 7. muhu: — repeatedly, many a times a day 8. sa annam — mixed with food 9. samudgam — before and after food 10 nishi— at night, bed time searel feat roel, ware AeA Sead Met Het WRT, ATARIET Ace ORIAeca: WT Tease ATA ate Aet ailst Fess aetRarah PUTA CART Aca Aes araH TEASTPIGNY Face WET Medicines should be administered, 1. Ananna-— on empty stomach — For diseases arising from increase of Kapha, which are severe and for persons who are strong, the time of administration of medicine shall be when there is no food- in the stomach ; 2. Annadau — just before food or at the beginning of food intake — in disorders of Apanavata, 3. Anna Madhye — During / in between food intake — in disorders of Samana vata 4, Anna ante — at the end of food intake — in disorders of Vyana vata at the end of the morning meal, in disorders of Udana vata at the end of evening meal. 5. Kavalantare — in between morsels — in disorders of Prana- vata 6. Grase Grase — With each morsel — in anorexia, loss of taste it shall be mixed with different kinds of tasty foods 7. Muhu: — Repeatedly, many a times a day — in diseases produced by poison, vomiting, hiccup, thirst, dysponea and cough 8. Sa annam — Mixed with food — in anorexia 9. Samudgam — before and after food — in tremors, Akshepaka (convulsions), Hiccup, 10 Nishi — at night, bed time — for diseases affecting head and neck. 37 Thus ends 13th chapter. Page No. 184 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 14 Dvividha Upakramaneeya afafaetasactts - Two Kinds of Treatment We are discussing two main kinds of Ayurveda treatments. Any treatment can be broadly classified either as stoutening / nourishing OR as emaciating. The 14" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana is called as Dvividha Upakramaneeya Adhyaya. Dvividha means 2 types. Upakrama means treatment. Let us explore further. Dvividha Upakarma- two kinds of therapy :- sapraee fe afacae afathsomat Aa: wa: Fatvreas afacravarrason: ¢ geo asada acsatargaredt Four Tages Agee HEAT AA 2 aeet Because, that to be treated, the human body is of two types — Obese and lean, the treatment is also of two kinds. 1. Santarpana- nourishing, enriching. It is also called as Brihmana (Stoutening, increasing weight, imparting heaviness) 2. Apartarpana —depleting, cleansing. It is also called as Langhana (fasting, losing weight, imparting lightness etc). 1-2 aaa: wey stared a Generally, Brihmana treatment is dominant with Prithvi (Earth element) and ap (water element). Langhana is dominant with the rest three elements (Fire, air and ether). Taree BA Het Taeet Tae T AT Sorat aah qdemefaas afrada Functions such as Snehana (oleation/ lubrication) and Rukshana — (imparting dryness), Swedana- (sweating therapy, sudation, diaphoresis), Sthambhana- (withholding, obstructing) are also of these two kinds- Brihmana and Langhana. Snehana and Sthambhana can be categorized as Brihmana and Rukshana and Swedana can be categorized as Langhana Thus all functions are not apart from two .3-3 Langhana therapy imparts lightness to the body. It makes the body thin and light. It is of two types. Page No. 185 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shodhana — Purification procedures (Panchakarma) and Shamana- palliative treatment. 4 waracattetset Tae weet T AL Shodhana treatment expels imbalanced Doshas out of the body forcibly. It is of five kinds, viz Niruha- decoction enema, Vamana- emesis, vomiting therapy Kaya reka- Virechana — purgation for the body Shio reka — Shiro Virechana — nasya — purgation for the head, nasal instillation of medicines. Asra-visruti — Raktamokshana — blood letting .5 a eerafa aeMret qareateRaeaha aaa fase wae aca Acar Orde Get afcqSeoaA a TAT: Shamana — palliative treatment is that which does not expel the increased Doshas out of the body, it does not increase the normal Dosha, but makes the abnormal- Doshas normal. In short, Shamana treatment brings imbalanced Dosha to normalcy. Shamana 7 types — Pachana — digestive, carminatives, Deepana — hunger producing, stomachic, Kshut — withstanding hunger, avoidance of food, fasting Trut— withstanding thirst/avoidance of water drinking, avoiding liquid food intake Vyayama- physical activity, Aatapa- exposure to sunlight and Maruta- exposure of breeze. 6-6 2 ¥EUl aAet cag aA: Acclietaesa a Brimhana- stoutening therapy also is Shamana only because it alleviates/ mitigates both Vata and Vata Pitta- combination. 7 Page No. 186 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Treatment < > Santarpana/Brihmana Apatarpana/Langhana (Nourishning) I (Thinning) >. Sodhana (Expel out Dosha) Shamana (Purification, Panchakarma) (Palliative, Dosha Balance) Vamana (Therapeutic Vomiting, Emesis) Pachana (Digstive) Virechana (purgation therapy) Deepana (Hunger Producing) Niruha (decoction enema) Kshut (Hunger tolerance) 1 2 3. Nasya (Nasal administration) 4. Trut (Thirst tolerance) 5 6. 7 Vy RYNS Raktamokshana (Blood letting) Vyayama (exercise) Aatapa (Sun exposure) Maruta (Breeze exposure) Persons requiring stoutening therapy - Brimhaneeya - qeaccatasty SrA aA ier ae ar fart eferen rarer ere SHCA STO TETAS, FACT AT EAST CTAeGcS Tet: Brimhana- stoutening therapy should be given to persons who are Vyadhi karshita — emaciated by diseases, Bhaishajya Karshita — emaciated by medicines- therapies, Madya Karshita — emaciated by alcohol Stri Karshita — Emaciated by excess sexual activity Shoka karshita — Emaciated by grief, Bhara — who carries heavy loads frequently Adhva — who has walked / travelled a long distance Urakshata — person with chest injury KShatakseena — who is debilitated due to injury Ruksha — who has excess dryness Durbala — debilitated Page No. 187 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vatala — Person with Vata body type. Garbhini — pregnant Sutika the women who has delivered, Bala — children, Vruddha — the aged and Greeshme — in the month of summer, even the other people, who are not indicated above should be given Nourishing therapy. Method of Brihmana - ; by the use of meat, milk, sugar, ghee, enema prepared sweet substances and fats(oil, ghee), sleep, comfortable bed, oil- massage, bath, comforts, rest and happiness of the mind. 8-9 2 Persons requiring thinning therapy — Langhaneeya — AerAaasfaarIsal FEEAEAPSaA: 80 Faraiaa cere renvoniarniraner: eyoied aseaivctea AAR q BARTATT 8 Langana- thinning, slimming therapy should be doneto Meha — diabetics Amadosha — persons suffering from Ama Atisnigdha —who has undergone excess oleation treatment Jvara — fever Urustambha — stiffness of the thighs, Kushta — skin diseases Visarpa — herpes, Vidhradi- abscess, Pleeha — diseases of spleen, Shira, Kanta Akshi roga — head, throat, and eyes; Sthula — Those are obese Even to others during Shishira — winter, Langhana treatment should be done. 10-11 Indication for Langhana therapy by means of Shodhana (Panchakarma) — aa deter: Talesra recap ieee TAs sareorercaneat: faartraihatesin gree aTTeT Heagateaigael Wea: Yd orerera rect: Utara, sereatersereret qeqeniraecttecactel ALATEST Page No. 188 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Patients with these diseases should be given Panchakarma treatment as the means for Langhana therapy. - Those who are very obese, strong and having predominance of Pitta and Kapha, those suffering from Amadosha, fever, vomiting, Diarrhoea , hearts diseases, constipation, feeling of heaviness, excess of belching, nausea, etc. Indication for Deepana, Pachana and then Shodhana (Panchakarma) - Those who are moderately obese, medium in strength of the body and also of the diseases mentioned, first by administration of digestives and hunger producing substances generally, later with other purification therapies; Indication for Shamana type of Langhana — Those who are troubled by increased Doshas, who are of medium strength, with medium strength disease, who are capable of withstanding strain by the control of hunger and thirst; those again of poor strength- of the body and of disease by exposing them to breeze, sunlight and exercise. 12- 14% a ggad asec Feud Ag asad % GM A SMH M eae] STINT Those who are to be given Langhana- thinning therapy, should not be given Brimhana- stoutening; those who are to be given Brimhana should be given mild Langhana, or both Langhana and Brimhana together, simultaneously may be given depending upon the nature of habitat, season, strength etc. 15 Benefits of Bruhmana therapy — Sfet Eales Ysera Aaa: Brimhana therapy makes for strength, nourishment of the body, and cure of such diseases which are curable by that therapy. 16 Benefits of Langhana Therapy - aeeneled: agadlesinavedi aaencaraeedenreneed aSfet Keenness and clarity of sense organs, Expulsion of Malas- Doshas and wastes, Feeling of lightness of the body, Good taste perception, Appearance of hunger and thirst together, Page No. 189 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Feeling of purity in the chest region (heart), Clear belching and clear throat, softening of the diseases- decreased severity, increase of enthusiasm and loss of stupor- laziness 16-17 seca Heded 7 afaraicaearsaat, aeted a a atyen: These- therapies indulged into in great measure than required, lead on to profound obesity and emaciation etc, which will be enumerated now, along with their treatment. 18 Ati Brimhana- excess of stoutening therapy :- sfacateuraditesa ters aeenreL PRAT UAH CMAP COTA TATOO MTEL, Excess of Brimhana therapy produces Atisthaulya — profound obesity Apachi — scrofula, Meha — Diabetes, UTI Jvara — fever Udara — enlargement of abdomen, Bhagandara — fistula-in-ano, Kasa — cough, Sanyasa — loss of consciousness, Mutrakruchra — Dysuria, Ama- disorders of poor digestive activities, Kushta -skin diseases which are very dreadful. 20 Treatment for over nourishing - aa AalfraeesAaned Tar PACA AAT HAI TATE HA, AR TaUSTSANSC Peer MT ATL Ayan Pret feared wet THSAAET AST: WETS Fae: Rens yates asa a: asso ATR a: aHroreetall A wate yor a ata sfeetoacherisra, Page No. 190 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Treatments which reduce Medas- fat, Anila- Vata and Kapha are desirable; Use of Kulattha — horse gram — Dolichos Biflorus, Jurna, Shyamaka, Yava — Barley — Hordeum Vulgare, Mudga — green gram — Averrhoa Carambola, and Honey water; Indulgence in worry, stressful activities Purification therapies, avoidance of sleep, either Triphala, Guduci, Abhaya —(Chebulic Myrobalan fruit rind — Terminalia chebula) and Musta (Cyperus rotundus), should be licked with honey daily; Either Rasanjana (Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata), Brihat Pancamula (Agnimantha, Shyonaka, Gambhari, Patala, Bilva), Guggulu — along with the fresh juice of Agnimnatha is suitable; Powder of Vidanga (False black pepper — Embelia ribes), Nagara — (Ginger), Kshara- Yavakshara and iron filing or powder of Yava (Barley — Hordeum vulgare) and Amla along with honey — should be licked daily. 21-24 centers one haarie fare gecat eget wore a begat ust gt ay yd det a weeny wedi: Siseapttad tie ferefet ad afeeateatear tatatnateaed aafaenet TAMTHTA CT LA ALATA PAT aT GAMA PeseaseeT Aree Powder of Vyosha- (Trikatu — pepper, long pepper and ginger), Katvi, Vara (Triphala), Shigru (drum stick), Vidanga (False black pepper — Embelia ribes), Ativisha, Sthira (Desmodium gangeticum), Hingu — (Asa foetida), Sauvarcala, Ajaji— (Cuminum cyminum), Yavani— (Trachyspermum ammi), Dhanya, Chitraka, the two Nisa (turmeric and tree turmeric), the two Brihati(brihati and kantakari), Hapusa, root of Patha (Cyclea peltata) and of Kebuka, should be mixed with honey, ghee and oil in equal proportion and sixteen parts of saktu (corn flour), this mixture diseases- mentioned earlier and even others of similar nature such as heart diseases, Jaundice, Leucoderma, Dyspnoea, cough, obstruction in the throat- hoarseness of voice etc. improves powder of thinking, intelligence, memory and kindles the weakened fire- digestive activity. 25-28 Atilanghana- excess of thinning therapy:- aicares art: SRrEqMenfeaaaTh: Tretafercreraaymtet: ace: Page No. 191 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vorealierervenerca te taesseaay aaa Bed afer Profound emaciation, Bhrama — Delusion, Dizziness, Kasa — cough, Trushna — severe thirst, Aruchi — anorexia, loss- decrease of moistness, and digestive power, of sleep, vision, hearing, semen, Ojas, hunger and voice; Pain in the urinary bladder, heart, head, calves, thighs, upper shoulders and flanks; fever, delirium- excess of talk, belching, exhaustion, vomiting, cutting pain in the joints and bones; non-elimination of faeces, urine etc., arise from excess of Langhana 29-30 ariaa a cateaid a fe FT AVA 1138 AEIT Aga AsaleaAalisetaraferl | Emaciation is better than obesity, there is no treatment for the obese, for, neither Brimhana nor Langhana are capable of vanquishing excess of fat, digestive activity and vata. 31 ayy fee afecticatedat a seater par cafaanstcded frat fertact: ateedgot at We Tareas TST Emaciation gets cured by use of sweet and unctous- fatty foods and comfortable living, whereas obesity gets cured by the use of the foods etc, of the opposites- qualities to the above that too when used in maximum quantity. There, liquids, foods and drugs which are Brimhana should be adopted 32-33 aftecer eit ya water 7 FACTSET HPeilae st Fait The emaciated person becomes stout like a boar by absence of worry, by happiness, more use of nutritious food and more of sleep. 34 Aca Ada aeeyccad farsa: 34 There is nothing other than meat to stouten the body, especially so the meat of carnivorous animals, for they feed on meat itself. 35 BEOIVE GE DI UOICD ULL Gas Page No. 192 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Foods which are heavy and non- nutrition are ideal for the obese whereas the opposites- are ideal for the emaciated; Yava — Barley — Hordeum vulgare- barley is heavy and non nutritious, ideal for obese and Godhuma- wheat is light to digest and nutritious, Hence good for emaciated. 36 asaen sfahkcaed meteaiestea: sip at ct afacatgern HT sar sa Though the states of Doshas are innumerable and innumerable are the kinds of treatments such as Grahi — withholding etc, still they do not surpass these two kinds- Brimhana and Langhana, just as the diseases- though innumerable fall into two kinds only, viz Sama and Nirama. (with and without Ama) Thus ends the chapter named Dvividhopakrmaniya- the fourteenth of Sutrasthana of Astanga Hrudaya Page No. 193 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 15 eiterenfe ar Group Of Herbs Used In Panchakarma This chapter deals with various groups of herbs that are used in Panchakarma treatment. The chapter name is Shodhanadi Gana Sangraha Adhyaya. Apart from purificatory herbs, it also explains about other groups used in preparing Ayurvedic medicine. Chardana Gana—group of Emetics :- FETA AEA FAM AEM A MAATA HC TAC TATA spied CTL fagrceataar: Herdcal aor Hvraa rad oAT ATT TET Madana (Randia spinosa), Madhuka (Licorice),Lamba, Nimba (neem), Bimbi (Coccinia grandis) Vishala, Trapusha, Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica), Murva, Devadali, Krimighna (Embelia tribes), Vidula, Dahana, Chitra (lead wort), the two Kosavati, Karanja, Kana (long pepper), Vacha (Acorus calamus), Ela (cardamom) and Sarhsapa (mustard) form the group of emetics. Virechana Gana - group of purgatives:- foprarprat nol srarat epee teeter eticredartet UaHHeeaheAG eM Ge a At a fatale Nikumbha, Kumbha, Triphala (Haritaki, Vibhitaki, Amalaki), Gavakshi, Snuk (Snuhi), Shankhini, Nilini (Indigofera tinctorea), Tilvaka, Samyaka, Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis), Hemadugdha, Dugdha (milk), and Mutra (urine) — are Purgatives. 2 Niruhana Gana- group of Drugs for decoction enema:- AearHeaprocdahayhaae MaoceM: waa pddedt HoeaAy aavt qaieweenter Madana (Randia spinosa), Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica), Kustha (Saussurea lappa), Devadali, Madhuka,Vacha, Dashamoola, Daru (Devadaru), Rasna, Yana, Mishi, Kritavedhanam, Kulattha (Horse gram), Madhu (Honey), Lavana (salt) and Trivrit- are Drugs for decoction enema. 3 Naavana Gana- group of Drugs for nasal medication:- arora stot MIT sed tad a antag: dead cette qeat yedten eerrecyccarssr Page No. 194 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vella, Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera), Vyosa (Trikatu — Pepper, long pepper and ginger), Darvi (Tree turmeric), Surala, Bija of Shirisha, Bhrihati and Shigru, Madhukasara, Saindhava (Black salt), Tarksyasaila, the two Truti and Prithvika- Purify the head. 4 Vataghna Gana—group of Drugs whichbalance vata:- ary drenfees facraifees arertet Bhadradaru (Cedrus deodara), Nata, Kustha (Saussurea lappa), Dashamula, the two Bala (Bala and atibala), the drugs of Virataradigana, and of Vidaryadi Gana balance vata. 5 Pittaghna Gana — group which balance Pitta:- Gat areca sen sere: efrrarshr Praga: raararie: Terarie: feat ad vst qae emRaeed Pear Durva, Ananta, Nimba (neem), Vasa, Atmagupta (Kapikacchu), Gundra, Abhiru, Sitapaki, Priyangu, drugs of Nyagrodhadi, and Padmakadi Gana, the two Sthira, Padmaka, Vanya and drugs of Sarivadi Gana bring about decrease of pitta. 6 Kaphaghna Gana- group which balance Kapha:- Hwee TUT FRAT LH CAH aTEA HATA: Drugs of Aragvadhadi, Arkadi, Muskakadi, Asanadi, Surasadi, Mustadi, and Vatskadi Ganas- brings about decrease of Balasa- Kapha .7 Jeevaniya Gana:- group of restoratives :- cated arateat At aa AesaTsaval 7 RMT hahahah afa aon sfacfrares Jeevanti, the two Kakoli (Kakoli and Ksheerakakoli), the two Meda (Meda and Mahameda), Mudagaparni, Masaparni, Rishabhaka, Jeevaka, and Madhuka — is known as Jivaniya Gana- group of restoratives. 8 Page No. 195 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vidaryadi Gana :- faarkasasarqRanrcigedtacareaayprqod: aga cfadedeada ad oSah aaga Prat Vidari, Panchangula, Vrischikali, Vrischiva, Devahvaya, the two Surpaparni, Kantakari, Drugs of Jivana Pancamula and Hrasva Pancamula, Gopasuta Tripadi- faeries gaat seu arattccer Ne CHTSTACTEGLaT HARA TTT: this Vidaryadi groups of Drugs are Hrudya — good to the heart | Bruhmana — stoutening, Vatapittaha — Mitigate Vata and Pitta, Useful in the treatment of Shosha — emaciation Gulma — abdominal tumor Angamarda — bodyache, Urdhwashwasa — wheezing Kasa— cough 9-10 Sarivadi Gana :- TRAPS asdl TEI Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus), Ushira, Kasmarya, Madhuka the two Sisira, Yashti and Parusaka- Bird ceca ssa ey cure burning sensation, bleeding disease, thirst and fevers.11 Padmakadi Gana — wergest gigas: yssaazar ae sraereat: Padmaka, Pundra, Vriddhi, Tuga, Riddhi, Shringi, Amrita and the ten drugs of Jeevaniya, gana. Benefits: FATA Eta et Horetsherersgorgsar: Page No. 196 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Stanyakara — cause production of breast milk, Balance Vata and Pitta, are nourishing, enlivening, stoutening and aphrodisiac. 12 Parushakadi Gana:- WEI AT gla Heth HAHA Hol weed ersa eeh Parushaka, Vara (Triphala), Draksha (Raisins), Katphala; Katakaphala, Rajahva, Dadima (Pomegranate) and Shaka Benefits — GEGRIGU CII IGE COW t cure thirst, urinary disorders and mitigate vata.13. Anjanadi Gana:- soot Wiel ART Teale SoTL doratpeated IN Anjana (Collyrium), Phalini, Mamsi (Jatamansi), Padma (Lotus), Utpala, Rasanjana (Aqueous extract of Berberis aristata), ela (Cardamom), Madhuka (Licorice), and Nagahva Benefits — faurecete tice cure diseases due to poison, burning sensation inside the body, and balance pitta. 14 Patoladi Gana:- f Feraror iar Tele gtigitraecei Atuargt T Patola, Katurohini, Chandana (Sandalwood), Madhusrava, Guduci (Tinospora), and Patha, fagira HHH ocd fay aN PAA balance Kapha and Pitta and cure skin diseases, fevers, poison, vomiting, anorexia and Jaundice. 15 Page No. 197 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Guduchyadi Guna :- ageloraHih cera act Guduchi (Indian tinospora), Padmaka, Arista, Dhanyaka and Raktachandana— Pacceca sa eo ace GoMET A Tarp, Mitigate Pita and Kapha, cure fever, vomiting, burning sensation, thirst and improves digestion. 16 Aragwadhadi Gana:- HNFAAHAATTC ferns arco HATA ATA ATATATATST: afore ad Sant cl or S TTA ATES se TA HATTA TT: Aragvadha, Indrayava, Patali, Kakatikta, Nimba (neem), Amrita, Madhurasa, Sruvavrka, Patha, Bhunimba, Sairyaka, Patola, the two Karanja (Karanja and Latakaranja), Saptachada, Agni (Chitraka), Susavi, Phala, Bana, and Ghonta- IRAs Seproraysarey ath Hog VAS 7 gpesrorfaenteret: this Aragvadhadi group cures vomiting, skin diseases poison, fevers, Mitigate kapha, itching, diabetes, and cleanses bad wounds. 17-18 Asanadi Gana- HAA ARATASHAA: USHA ATA TY SIT: PRACT: MHMaHAH UAH Aga CH THOT AHUT: Asana, Tinisa, Bhurja, Swetavaha, Prakiya, khadria, Kadara, Bhandi, Simsipa, Mesasrngi, the three Hima, tala Palasa, Jongaka Saka, Sala , Kramuka, Dhava, Kalinga, Chagakarna, and Asvakarna- seenieidsrad Rasproap israel agit was a Adlareferaerr: this asanadi group cures leucoderma, skin diseases, mitigates kapha ,cures diseases and other skin diseases, mitigates kapha, cures diseases of worms, Anaemia, diabetes and diseases of fat accumulation 19-20 Page No. 198 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Varunadi Gana — APU F HATA AA SATAN ACA TTT: Aagediahaasssraeas TAISAAS SATAN: Varuna, the two Sairyaka, Satavari, Dahana, Morata, Bilva, Visanika, the two Brhati thw two Karanji, the two jaya, Bahalapallava, Dardha and Rujakara- ane: HH Act Aealeted fracafet seta RA: ol TeH aed: Btaarey this Varunadi groupbsubjugates kapha, fat and dyspepsia, cures Adhyavata- rigidity of the thighs, headaches, tumors and abscess inside the abdomen. 21-22 Usakadi Gana- ayer fesy ariegatietay SINC IGE 2) Usaka, tutthaka, Hingu, the two Kasisa, saindhava and Silajitu- PCSRATeAA: HBA cure Dysuria, Urinary calu;us, abdominal Tumors, obesity and subjugates Kapha.23 Virataradi Gana- AeA chsh MAAS MH UC hehe ATA ATATAT: FATT APACAA ICSI $A OTHANC HOC AAT TA: Guntha,Gundra, Bhalluka, Morata, Kuranta, Karambha and Partha- aat dxereat srt elect aeepetel Aare HATTA EGTA SST: this Virataradi group cures diseases produced by Vata, urinary stones and Gravel, Dysuria, Suppression of Urine and pain 24-25 Page No. 199 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Rodhradi Gana- Teerarateronen fsrstaroientcne hry ra: Pima aes: daareattaraata: Rodhra, Sabarakarodhra, Palasa, Katphala, Yukta, Kutsitamba, Kadali, Gatasoka, Elavalu, Paripelava, and Moca- us venfaat ara Aq: HwHEN WT: OYerelvex: Fare aout fastaererd: this group known as Rodhradika, cures diseases of fat and Kapha, disordered of Vagina, produces obstruction- to movements of dosas and Malas, good for color and destroys poision. 26-27 Arkadi Gana — saree ater faerear sisefl tea gitaareh yar wear tracetedhtar tacrsa ara Tt gar: Arka , Alarka, Nagadanti, Visalya, Bharngi, Rasa, Vrscikali, Prakriya, Pratyapuspi, Pitataila, Udakirya, the two Sveta and Tapasa Vrksa- saaeitent at: atpaetasrg: pprourAel favrsregoreneret: c this Arkadi Gana, Mitigates Kapha, fat, poision, worms, other skin diseases and especially cleanses the Ulcers. 28-29 Surasadi Gana- RaPTEisst Hea asst agaVanvitaene Heya: TAPERS: HATH Horsohawaywersye Miers The two Surasa, Phanijja, Kalamala, Vidanga, Kharabusa, Vrsakarni, Katphala, Kasamarda, Ksavaka, Sarasi, Bharngi, Karmuka, Kakamaci, Kulahala, Visamusti, Bhutrna, Bhutakesi aeanfestor: eerste: piaferyeat: WAAAY TUT RTCA: this surasadi Gana mitigates Kapha, fat, worms, common cold, Anorexia, Dyspoea, cough and cleanses the wounds. 30-31 Page No. 200 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Muskakadi Gana — Muskaka, Srug, Vara, Dvipi, Dhava and Simsipa FPHASARIZAT: HHH AL this group cure abdominal tumor, Diabetes , Real caluculus, Anaemia, obesity, Haemorrhoids, Disorders of Kapha and semen. 32 Vatsakadi Gana- acerenaaTSat ea avd gata o awsR Ve Wor sTatahtencageporarata fg fara: streanfesasset Wester TsTalech Vatsaka, Murva, Dharngi, Katuka, Marica, Ghunapriya, Gandira, Ela, Patha, Ajaji, Katvanga phala, Ajamoda, Siddhartha, Vaca, Jiraka, Hingu, Vidanga, Pasugandja and Pancakola- ata aorapag: Slee oH SA Geet: drugs of this group cures disorders of vata, Kapha and medas, Rhinitis, Abdominal Tumor, Fever, Colic, and Haemorhoids . 33-34 Vachaharidradi Gana- Pasa cae aA Aa STS: aiRereaaascatedhoiipeciga: Vaca, Jalada,Devahva, Nagara, Ativisa, and Abhya; the two Haridra, Yasti, Kalasi, Kuta Jodbhava- qareRatesorararcranartat these Vaca Haridadi Gana Cure Acte Diarrhoea- or that caused by accumulations of Ama diseases of fat, kapha Adhyapavana- stiffness of the things and Disorders caused by breast milk. 35-36 Page No. 201 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Priyangu- Ambasthadi Gana — PASS ARATE: Tago Wotetdedeted Algal ARNE: AST Goals Acefagd: HFISS Atl THEA aed yarqol Heat: Ver oahiaeaiNeay Hass: HAAG Tt: Priyangu Puspa,, two Anjana, Padma, Padmaraja, Yojanavalli, Ananta, Manadruma, Mocarasa, Samanga, Pannaga, Sita and Madniya hetu; Ambasatha, Madhuka, Namaskari, Nandivrksa, Palasa, Kacchura, Rodhra, Dhataki, Bilvapesika, Katvanga and Kamalaraja- aot Passarasordtarardrananerct Beet feat Ped aoraraky weit these Priyangu and Ambasthadi groups cure chronic Diarrhoea, heal fractures, good for pitta and are even healers of ulcers. 37-39 Mustadi Gana — Musta, Vaca, Agni, the two Nisa, the two Tikta, Bhallata, Patha, Triphala, Visakhya, Kustha, Truit and Haimavati- MerearaaAee ATTA cures diseases of Vagina, Breastmilk, and cooks the Malas —Dosas. 40 Nyagrodhadi Gana- TIMI HORTA TET aapeT ea tena TOT: CAAT AA TA AT AT A eatealehlohche Fa LAA APA Nyagrodha, Pippala, Sadaphala, the two Rohra, the two Jambu, Arjuna, Kapitana, Somavalka, Plaksa, Amra, Vanjula, Piyata, Patasa, Nanon, kon, Kadamba, Virala, Madhuka and Madhuka- aaa qos: AsaT HseAect: Fe: Tcaraqsateatientarerserr: this nyarodhadi group is good for wounds/ ulcers, cause constipation, unites fractures, cures fat accumulation, bleeding disease, thirst, burning sensation, and diseases of Vagina. 41-42 Page No. 202 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Eladi Gana — Vera eH p ron fort aaa carat EyerHra a aT aT ea: arfeceatercrat HARTETHITS: MATT: PShA DSTA: Yoel CT A, The two ela (Big and small variety), Turuska, Kustha, Phalini, Mamsi, Jala, Dhayamaka, Sphrkka, Coraka, Coca, Patra, Tagara, Sthauneya, Jatirasa, Sukti, Vyaghranaka, Amarahva, Aguru »Srivasaka, Kumkuma, Canda, Guggulu, Devadhupa, Khapura, Punnaga and Nagahvaya- Velent aan fay a faferrcate aoivereet: Hughtfearcntooteret: this Eladigana cures disorders of vata, Kapha and poison, improves color/ complexion, cures itching, Pustules and skin Rashes.43-44 Shyamadi Gana - wage gaa MUS AA TAME Favted fara Ret aterh eae S aT: seat carfteral seragraechengand barter Shyama, danti, Dravanti, Kramuka, Kutarana, Sankhini, Carmasahva, Svarnaksiri, Gavaksi, Sikhari, Rajanaka, Chinnaroha, Karanja, Bastantri, Vyadhighati, Bahala, Bahurasa and Tiksnavrksaphala- eae sfedt aoa frsaretrant eget Fapes this Syamdi group cures abdominal Tumor, poison, Anorexia, diseases of kapha, heart ache- diseases and Dysuria. 45 sarereretea waa aaedy Caos: qrucdedaeyed set Teaealtarenay Thus, were described thirty three groups- of drugs; such of the drugs not available may be substituted with others of identical properties and such drugs not appropriate- to the group may be rejected.46 Ud aah aeqMrenter Henraencare reegra: UaaeY eared sedsieal Soeasstetiod Weary apeaL The drugs of these groups made into medical formulations such as Kalka- wet bolus, Quatha- decoction, Snejha- medicated fats, Leha- confections etc. to be used for drinking, nasal drops, oil enema, topical, topical application, anointing etc, either internally or externally , cure diseases which are obstinate. 47 Thus ends the chapter Sodhanadi Gana Sangraha, the fifteenth in Sutrasthana of Astangahradayam Page No. 203 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 16 Snehavidhi tefafe - oleation therapy Here we are explaining in detail about the procedure of Snehana, treatment by drinking fat, that is administered just before performing emesis (Vamana) Panchakarma therapy. It is the 16" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, called as Snehavidhi Adhyaya. Qualities of oil and fats - Snehana Dravya Guna — ae eft Oy Raver ag AeA AG aa The Snehana substances — used for oleation therapy have the following qualities - Guru — heaviness Sheeta — cold Sara — easily moving, mobility, spreading Snigdha — unctuous, oily Manda — mild, Sookshma — minute Mrudu — soft Dravam — liquid The substances used for imparting dryness to the body (Rookshana) are of opposite qualities to the above-mentioned. Oleating substances — Sneha Dravyah — attatioon aa det Hey Wat AceL Ta calc BTS: See Aa sfeareccard seared a eforetret Sarpi (ghee, clarified butter), Majja (bone marrow), Vasa — muscle fat and Taila (oil) — are considered best among oleating substances; Among these, Ghee is the best. Because, Madhura — sweet in taste Avidahi — it does not cause burning sensation Janmadyeva sheelanat — it is congenial to the body since birth. 2 — 3a. Picceated enya Talc Among them, Ghee is the most efficient for Pitta balance and Taila is the least efficient for the same. 3b. Page No. 204 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Fad det aS sat dord Ast Tat HT a When compared between the four, ghee is very light to digest. Oil is heavier (hard to digest) than ghee, muscle-fat is heavier than oil, marrow is heavier than all. career PR: age: ct: aa: gat Aer Mixture of two oleating substances is called as Yamaka. Mixture of three is called as Trivrit and All four combined is called as Mahasneha. 4b. Snehyah — persons suitable for oleation :- Faea Beneaaeaefeayrawanarra elegy: FEA TAP VAT: AVIA: 4 ara rare fafAareora fara Peter: wie: People who require Snehana therapy are - Svedya, Samshodhya — Those who are to be administered sudation and purification therapies, Madya Stree, Vyayama asakta — who indulge more in wine, women and exercise; Chintaka — who think too much, Vruddha — the aged, Bala — the children, Abala — the debilitated, Krusha — the emaciated, fatigue; Ruksha — who are dry, Ksheena asra retas — Depleted blood and semen, Vatarta — who are suffering from diseases of Vata, Timira — ophthalmia, blindness, who suffer from chronic disorder 5 — 6a. Asnehya — persons unsuitable for oleation :- aq aidaeartter canttar caer Gaon: SeeaeH HAN HATTA: Fearedaqaeraearagenacaes HSA: HOTT Yet a AA sect fara Patients who should not be given Snehana therapy are - Atimandagni— Those who have very weak digestion power Teekshnagni -or very strong digestive power Sthula — obsese Durbala — very weak Page No. 205 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Urustambha — stiffness of thighs Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery Amaroga — indigestion, Ama condition, altered metabolism Galaroga — diseases of throat Gararoga — chronic poisoning Murcha — fainting, loss of consciousness Chardi— Vomiting Aruchi — anorexia Shleshmaroga — diseases of Kapha imbalance Trushnaroga — excessive thirst Madyapeedita — chronic alcoholic Apaprasuta — lady who has undergone abortion Nasya, Basti Virechana — people who re to be nasal medication, enema and purgative therapies. 6-8a. Ghrita Yogya: GE efreqiatenicnrsterorey rere Ya Ghrita (ghee) is best suited for those who desire improvement of intelligent, memory, intelligence etc. 8b. Taila Yogya: Diet Srp lA AAAS acd ATTA EAI RTATESY, afey Taila (oil) is suited in diseases like Granthi — tumour, Nadi roga — sinus ulcer Krumiroga — worm infestation Shleshmaroga — diseases of Kapha imbalance Medoroga — obesity Marutaroga — Diseases due to imbalance of Vata for those who desire thinning and sturdyness of the body, and who have hard bowel movements. 9. Vasa Majja Yogya: eA AAT CaS ARATE HATHA MATA A AAT AT ATAT vet, car gq Heatewastatvovsny a AM qeegaayscarearpri errs Vasa and Majja - Muscle-fat and marrow are suited for persons Vatatapa — who are depleted of their tissues from exposure to breeze, sunlight, long distance Page No. 206 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan walk, carrying heavy load, women (sexual activity) and physical activities; Ruksha — who are dry, who withstand strain, who have very strong digestive activity, and in whom Vata is obstructed in its normal pathways. Vasa — Muscle-fat is suited for pain of the joints, bones, vital organs and abdominal viscera; so also for pain of burns, assault by weapons, displacement of vagina (prolapsed), earache, and headache. 10-11. da wgit, asted aitieat g are | Oil is ideal for use during Pravrit — first rainy season, ghee during end of Varsa i.e., Sharat- autumn. The others during Madhava i.e. Vasantha — spring. 12a. Snehayogya Kala — proper time for oleation therapy :- mal UTM Tag: eat aifeat faster Tat During temperate seasons use of oleating materials should be done during day time and when the sun is clear. 12b. cot carrer efter aft eah aft a yet feria Oil may be used in emergency even in cold season and ghee, even in summer and even at night. 13a. fata fied vat det eaacaty In diseases produced by increased Pitta and Vata and in their combination with predominance of Pitta — ghee should be used only at nights — during summer. 13. PRAT aAaHwaT: Fy: Wectat ear Otherwise, diseases due to Vata and Kapha arise if fats are used at nights and diseases of Pitta if used during day. 13 — 14a. Number of Oleation recipes — Sneha Samkhya —:- GHATS TEM Heeler AEA: FEATS HATO SITS HOMAT TTT: Fats should be used properly either mixed with chewable and other kinds of foods or in the form of enemas, nasal drops, anointing over the body, holding in the mouth, putting over the head, into the ears and eyes. 14b — 15a. Page No. 207 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan PACAP Aca cereded HATA: By its use with substances of different tastes and separately, without admixture, it will be sixty four number of recipes. Sneha Vicharana — use of fat mixed with foods is poor — mild in effect because of its mingling with other materials and also because of lesser quantity. 15b — 16a. Baeragcasiared areata fAIROT || ks || MST Het: A Avs: Tee | Acchapeya of Sneha — means consuming the oils / fats without mixing with food. Sneha Vicharana means — consuming after mixing with food items. Acchapeya method of administering fats is considered best as it serves the function of fats and lubrication quickly. 16b — 17a. Acchapanamatra — dose of fats for drinking :- casa aA s ied BT: RATT SrdAeacdal ASAT earn wertedier aterde, uera qf edrerty The dose of fats depends upon the digestive activity of the patient. The heena matra (least dose) is the one, which digests in 2 yaama (1 yaama = 3 hours) The medium dose (Madhyama matra) is the one, which undergoes digestion in 3 yama (9 hours) The high dose (Uttama matra) is the one, which undergoes digestion in 4 yama (12 hours). Hraseeyasi matra — the minimum quantity should be administered in the beginning after considering the condition of Dosha etc. 17b — 18. The Hraseeyasi matra is the very little quantity of sneha, that is given to the patient, just to judge the digestive strength. After judging the digestion power, the right dose of the fat is decided. Snehapanavidhi — procedure of drinking fat :- eae Sot vate Teel eG: Yat ag: For Shodhana — As a preparation procedure to Panchakarma therapy, Acchasneha — drinking of fat alone should be soon after digestion of previous food and in maximum dose. Waa: aed Hara ALITA ead Page No. 208 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan For Shamana — For mitigation of Doshas, for palliating a disease, fats should be consumed when the person is hungry and without food — fasting and in medium dose. 19. goon tanegred: aarret sec: For Brimhana — For weight gain treatment, it should be given mixed with meat soup, wine etc. and consumed along with food, in small quantity — minimum dose. 20a. Ra: aa arergqa Prararcertealaraeaehiery Panes aaa sega FgHorewasay prey TT PNY 7 This kind of mild oleation is suitable to children, the aged, those suffering from thirst, those who have aversion to fat, who indulge in wine, women and fatty foods daily, who have poor digestive ability, who lead happy life, who are afraid of troubles, who are of soft bowel, who have little quantity of— increase of Doshas; during hot season and for the emaciated. 20 — 21. WISACAeRaFa STATaM AeA CaaS ae caeissteges Haase TTA Hay Tf fats are used before food, it is useful in the treatment of diseases affecting the lower part of the body. It strengthens the upper part of the body. If fats are used during the food intake, it is useful in the treatment of diseases affecting the middle part of the body. It strengthens the middle part of the body. If fats are used after the food intake, it is useful in treating the diseases of the upper part of the body. It strengthens the lower part of the body.22. Care after drinking fats — Sneha upachara — aad sated we aaa arearrerncet a, dlarrecny at Actes: RMetted Ya eT: After Acchapana — (drinking of fat alone), warm water should be consumed. It helps in digestion and clears the mouth coating. But while taking Tuvaraka taila or Arushkara taila (very hot in nature), cold water is preferred. In case of doubts regarding digestion of the fat, warm water should be consumed again; Purification, clear belching, feeling of lightness in the body and desire for food — these 3 symptoms suggest that the fat has been completely digested. 23 — 24. Page No. 209 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Diet for the of fat consumption — ST Heel ATA oeAe ea: eareahey Fao saiea TAA eas Foods which are liquid (drava), warm (Ushna), not producing excess moisture inside (anabhishyandi), not very oily (na atisnigdha) and not a mixture of many food materials, should be consumed by the patient in limited quantity. 25 DONGHTIN FAL TEAANT STITT: at Sate, cararaaAlereiteH SAAT 2E VAAT AA ACA SAAT Aaa: Areas: FAAS T meaeltet acai AdecaeMeae cart Regimen after oleation - Ushnodakopachari — The person should use warm water only for all his activities. Brahmachari — Should maintain celibacy. He should eat only when hunger. Na vegarodhi— should not suppress natural urges, not indulge in exercise, anger, grief, exposure to cold, sunlight, breeze, riding on animals, travelling in vehicles, walking long distance, too much of speaking, remaining in uncomfortable postures for long time, keeping very low or very high pillow under the head, sleeping during day, contact with smoke and dust; on the days of drinking fats and for same number of days afterwards also. 26-28a. vaneead wer carferaitergy a shat: This regimen is the same generally for all purification therapies such as emesis, purgation, enema etc. and also for those debilitated by diseases. 28b. STINE wae Hs: TAs faRactad In case of Shamana Sneha — palliative oleation therapy the regimen as suggested for the person who has undergone purgation therapy — vide chapter 18 should be adopted. 29a. Acchapana Kala — duration of fat drinking :- qapHes Hel Hes HT Ucafeal ect BRaeeara AMaT Uda: Ura Hac, Acchapana — drinking fat alone should be done for three days for — persons of soft bowels (Mrudu koshta), for seven days for persons of hard bowels (Krura koshta) or till the symptoms of good oleation Page No. 210 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan appear. After that period it — fat becomes accustomed to the patient and does not give the desired effect. 29b — 30a. aaeees atect sitadd: Rareedecel 30 sates q Wgcd Mara: 38 Snigdha Lakshana — signs of oleation :- Vatanulomana — Downward movement of Vata, Deepto agni— keen digestive activity, Vachaha snigdham asamhatam — faeces becoming fatty and non formed not solid, Snehodvega — aversion to fat, Klama — exhaustion —are the signs of proper lubrication; opposite of these are the sign of dryness. Appearance of pallor — yellowish white discoloration and secretions from the nose, mouth and rectum are the signs of excess lubrication. 30b — 31. Snehavyapat Laksana — bad effects of improper oleation :- saa sia are fAearenfaena: ae: aie eterelearaeaea raga: PUSHPA FAM MAMTA HTT Fat drinking in improper dose, unsuitable kind, improper time, indulging in improper foods and activities produces dropsy, haemorrhoids, stupor, rigidity — loss of movement, loss of sensation / unconsciousness, itching, skin diseases, fever, nausea, pain in the abdomen, flatulence, dizziness ete. 32 — 33a. Snehavyapat Cikitsa — treatment of bad effects :- eq oA AG OA Me oA TTA, APTS AEA AA aT AG TAT Reach wonatareareneyaae aT RTD 29 gard ofenret a crecaaie Tere Kshut, Trushna — Producing hunger, thirst, Ulleka, sveda — vomiting and perspiration, administering foods, drinks and medicines which are dry (cause dryness), use of Takrarista (fermented medicine from buttermilk), Khala— menu prepared from curds, Uddala, Yava (barley), Shyamaka, Kodrava, Pippali (long pepper), Triphala, Ksaudra (honey), Pathya (haritaki), Gomutra — cow urine, Guggulu and such others — foods, drugs etc. prescribed Page No. 211 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan for each disease are the methods of treating the diseases due to improper Snehana therapy. 33b — 35a. Virukshana — therapy to cause dryness :- fama asuctaepaliapc rary, The features of proper and excess Viruksana — dryness are the same as those of proper and excess of Langhana — methods of making the body thin. 35b. Regimen of Panchakarma followed after Snehana — Parga wea TCA feaqseesue Tea: Harefars, ae at: wag Raaeaed HHT AA ache: The patient should drink juice of meat of animals of desert — like regions, mixed with fats, made liquid — thin and warm, then undergo sudation therapy; after three days of such regimen, he should be administered purgation therapy, after a lapse of one day, Kapha should be increased by using things — food, drugs etc. which cause its increase and then emesis — therapy should be administered. 36 — 37a. ATT ACR aca Farerswsera: weelhraread YF Treaeae, Ys Baca: deren wet Hecate STIS Hot AMAA CAVIaACAA aeA: Persons who are muscular, fatty, having Kapha imbalance, and erratic type of digestive activity, who are accustomed to fats and who need oleation therapy, should be made to become dry first — by use of foods, drugs etc. and then administered oleation therapy followed with purification therapies; by this procedure complications of oleation will not arise. This method is enough to excite the vitiated Dosha to be eliminated 37b — 39a. Sadya sneha Yoga — recipes for immediate oleation :- aTerqantey TET RENAE TT MMe AAe Me AeA: Free TAS For children, the aged etc., for those who cannot withstand the discomforts or avoidance of things prohibited during of oleation therapy, can be administered the following recipes which are Sadya sneha — immediate oleation/ lubrication and which are non-harming. 39. Page No. 212 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan WISTARRETEAY, Ta at FArssfetay vo faorpied aetewers:, FET TA STAT FAA, qtall AT Aas: AT: ve wag Wagar: Sle: cTegeSTA: Juice of meat prepared from more quantity of meat, Peya — gruels, fried with more quantity of fats, powder of Tila mixed with fat and half boiled molasses (Phanita), Krisara — rice cooked along with green gram, mixed with the same things as above, Ksheerapeya — gruel prepared from milk, mixed with more quantity of ghee — butter fat and made warm; Dadhi Sara — yoghurt water, whey from curds mixed with Guda (jaggery), Panchaprasruta Peya — thin gruel prepared from one Prasruta each of ghee, sesame oil, muscle fat, marrow and rice (tandula). These seven recipes are Sadyassneha — fat recipes which produce immediate oleation. 40 — 42. Sava TaTNeSOT: qaqa T YeAA cya u And also fats mixed with more amount of salt are Sadya sneha because salt is Abhisyandhi (causes exudation in the tissues), Arooksha — does not cause dryness, Suksma — capable of entering into minute pores, Ushna — hot in potency and Vyavayi spreads all over the body first and later undergoes transformation. 43a. Contra indication for certain substances in certain diseases — Tse Tat FeroAT TAT Fe aN > ProMHwAsy Tres aT THAT For the purpose of Sadya snehana, Jaggery, meat of birds of marshy lands, milk, sesame seed, black gram, Sura — beer and Dadhi — curds, yogurt should not be used for purposes of oleation in skin diseases (kushta), inflammatory conditions (Shopha) and diabetes (Prameha). Because these substances may worsen the disease. 43b — 44a. Pentre aearesa eae rea rearAey reel VaTEaA aw Atsralaenrheor: In these conditions, fats boiled with Triphala, Pippali, Pathya, Guggulu, etc., should be used as found suitable, which will not produce abnormalities. 44 — 45a. Page No. 213 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan attoren carerehe Peete te fare eT ATL For those who are debilitated by diseases, fats which are capable of increasing the strength of the body and of the digestive activity should be made use of for oleation therapy. 45b. Snehapana Phala — benefits of drinking fats :- aecieR ist: URYEHISS: TTT erqaoractara: \eeiegah Heco: wary: Tera Ges: wee: I ve Il He, who has very keen digestive activity, clean alimentary tract, well developed/strong tissues, physical strength, colour — complexion and powerful sense faculties, who is slow in getting old and who lives for a hundred years is the person who is habituated to oleation in otherwords these are the benefits of oleation therapy if adopted often. 46. Thus ends the chapter named Snehavidhi, the sixteenth in Sutrasthana of Astangahrdayam. Page No. 214 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 17 Swedana Vidhi Sudatuin Therapy / Sweating We are explaining Swedana procedure in this chapter. Swedana refers to sweating or sweating therapy. The term sweda means sweat. The patient is made to sweat on purpose. Usually this procedure is done after doing the oleation therapy (Snehakarma), that we studied in the last chapter. Kinds of sweating treatments — Swedana Prakara Paaeaatuetesagavereda racy: 3 1. Tapa- fermentation, 2. Upanaha- warm poultice, 3. Ushma- warm steam and 4. Drava — pouring of warm liquid. Tapa Sweda ANH SAMA Ae Hae eae ie fay: Tapa Sweda is done by touching the affected part of the body with heated cloth, metal plate, forhead, Palm of the hand etc. 1 Upanaha Sweda See! Ta PHvarrarearcaa;re ay: oet: waed: wether Ue Ws seria: Upanaha Sweda is application of poultice prepared from Vacha (Acorus calamus), Kinva-yeast, Shatahva (Dill), Devadaru — (Himalayan cedar (bark) — Cedrus deodara) etc. any kind of grains, all substances having pleasant smell, roots of Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) and Castor (Eranda); or meat; siorceratt: Eley AHTE: Cec: hal Tact, Vols eAsS TTA Pa: faccer vsraredted Breau: Yet: Yet: each one added with more of salt, fats-oil ghee etc. Chukra- Vinegar, Takra-Buttermilk and milk. in increase of vata associated with sleshma / kapha drugs of aera, / surasaadi gana, in increase of vata associated with pitta drugs of padmakadi / Tf gana Page No. 215 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan It is preferred in people with Vata imbalance—poultice are known as Salvana upanaha and should be applied often. 2-3 ase drt Ageat Taare: weet aatsrcrrelransaencs: After applying the poultice, the part of the body should be bandaged with soft piece of leather which does not have bad smell, which has been oiled; it should be slightly warmed and tied; If leather is not available, leaves of plants which balance Vata, silk cloth, or woolen cloth may be used; arti wat far apaeaSderat fear poultice tied during night should be removed during day and that tied during day should be removed during night.4-5 Ushma Sweda- SPAT GPITS HUTA TATA: wager aed attends: seared: False aera: Here the steam of the hot substance is directed towards the body part. Steam may be obtained by Utkarika- (boiling grains, pulses, seeds etc). Stones, pebbles, mud, leaves pieces, grains, dried dung of animals like cow, Sheep, Goat etc, Sand, Husk ete are also used for this purpose. 6-7 a Drava Sweda — TARTAN STAT TTL, waaay Aaah st: aweet UT yee Beda were prittoediatstat yricar sone aR sealed wa arse Peder Warm liquid is prepared by boiling bits of leaves of drumstick, Varanaka ,Eranda — (Castor — Ricinus communis), Karanja, Surasa, Arjaka, Shireesa, Vasa , Vamsha, Arka, Malati (Jasmine) or Dirghvrinta, with drugs of vachadigana — vide chapter 15, meat of animals of Marshy land and of those living in water, drugs of Dashamula, each one separately or all together, mixed with fats — Page No. 216 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan oil, ghee etc. appropriate to the Dosha; Sura- beer, Sukta- fermented gruel, water and milk. This medicated liquid should be filled into pot, jug with spout, or a tube and poured slowly and steadily over the painful part covered with cloth. 7b-10 aa ar gd: Wot gus watset aiferct Hames siKeassak: Fepewat T In case of Vata affecting the entire body, the same- medicated water may be filled into tub and the patient made to sit in it, this method can be adopted in piles, Dysuria etc.11 Swedavidhi— procedure of Sweating therapy:- ferara Heaaie fearset sfotet: TAqaratd FAGAN Sweating should be administered to him who has been given Snehana- both internally- by drinking fats and externally- anointing oil over the body, who is staying in a room devoid of breeze and after his meal has been completely digested. 12 a carrey CATIA I ALM ALTA Sweating may be mild, moderate or strong depending upon the condition of the disease, Patient, habitat and season. 12b wpa Barer wait, Person suffering from diseases of Kapha should be given sweating treatment in dry condition- without the use of fat internally and externally and with dry liquid — without addition of fats; In case of Kapha and Vata- increased together the patient should be in dry condition and liquid mixed fats — should be used for sweating. 13 a sTareresra arat eth serarerentare When vata is localized in the Amashaya- stomach dry sweating should be given. When Kapha is localized in Pakvasaya- (intestines), oil-sweating should be given. 13b-14 a Hot ager: Faod TH ASH Fae aT AT Sweating should be very mild / nil over the groins and also on the eye, scrotum and heart. 14b Page No. 217 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Benefits of sweating treatment — care to be taken - Swedana phala and Upacana —:- ate eer at facet ord seat wT Aca Rad wet: Aiea: Tale: FASTA stot 5 Diminution of cold and pain and softness of the organ accrue from Sweating. After wards the body should be massaged slowly, given bath —in warm water and allowed comfort s as prescribed in lubrication therapy.15 Ati Swedana phala — effects of excess Sweating :- Facarrny GoHEoT FAIS Aeet SAT: Bist Sat: Lae HUSA Tet ve Aggravation of Pitta and vitiation of blood, thirst, loss of consciousness, weakness of voice and body, Bhrama — Delusion, Dizziness Sandhipeeda — pain in the joints , Jvara — fever, appearance of black- blue, red patches on the skin, and vomiting are produced by excess of Sweating therapy; For that , Stambhana treatment should be done. It is the same procedure, useful in diarrhoea and bleeding disorders. Treatment of AtiSwedana : aan Seed, aa Taesrratwafeay amifset aia of AleTay 7 aa tarsrratyey Withholding, stopping, hindering of elimination is the treatment, so also for patients suffering from poison, caustic Alkali and Barding by free; Diarroea, vomiting and unconsciousness /6-17 Qualities of Svedana and Stambhana Dravyas: Faeat ae Hector ore:, Eaeseae TAT Faas eA WATS Fadel, TAF eT LARUT BAT FRA Wad Generally substances which are heavy, penetrating and hot in potency are used Swedana therapy. Substances of opposite are used in Sthambhana (withholding ,hindrances to elimination) Drugs which are liquid, sthira — static, mobile, unctous, dry and penetrating bring about sweating. Those which are smooth, dry, thin, mobile and liquid, bitter, Astringent and sweet in taste are generally Stambhana 18-19 Page No. 218 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan FaEHA: CMeae Ae UAE ATATASSATL Stambhana is useful in diarrhoea and bleeding disorders therapy, With this treatment, the person gains Strength and gets relieved of symptoms of excess sweating disappear. 20a Symptoms of excess Sthambana — Tah TARASHT HIE are: Gelsecarayt: gard: afaeaearcaareyd Contraction of skin and tendons, tremors, stiffness of region of heart, choking of voice, locked jaw, black discoloration of the feet, lips, skin and hands. 20-21a ASwedayah — persons Unsuitable for Sweating:- a Taal aicheyorwargdereyresarey Terese parca OTA AACA TOT: fafentardertproeiterea aan: Haqrechieteatel palate] STSC ETT STH for mrereareansr aM Tae FeqVrarmea4nnngared: Teahtsarey Atishoola Atirooksha — highly dry Durbala — weak, debilitated Murchita — fainted, unconscious Those who are fit for Sthambhana treatment, Kshataksheena — wounded, injured Patients with Ama condition, Madyavikari — chronic alcoholics Night blindness, Visarpa — herpes Kushta Shosha — emaciated who have recently consumed milk, curds, fat, Who have just undergone Virechana treatment Who are burnt, Who are tired, suffering from anger, grief, fear, excess tirst, hunger, Kamala — liver diseases Pandu — anemia Meha — urinary disorders People with Pitta imbalance. Page No. 219 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan women who are pregnant, menstruating — during periods and delivered — recently . in case of emergency diseases , it should be done mildly — for the above. 21-24 Persons who deserve Swedana — Svedyah- PART HRAM AAA ee FARACHACATY LASHATALAE IANS Fecd aaa: Geuanesy aanvedh FAT PeB AS Tie Ae PTAA STATS Fag ware Hate cabwerfasiara: Shwasa — dysnoea, COPD, Asthma Kasa — cough, Pratishyaya — running nose, allergic rhinitis Hidhma — hiccup, Adhmana — bloating Vibandha — constipation Svarabheda — altered voice, hoarseness Vatavyadi — diseases of Vata imbalance Angamarda — bodyache stiffness in lower back, flanks, back, abdomen and jaws enlargement of the scrotum, contractions of toes and fingers, tetanus sprains, dysuria, Malignant tumor- cancer, bening tumor, obstruction to the flow of semen and urine, and Adhyamaruta- Thigh stiffness. 25-27 Anagni Sweda — Sweating without fire source — Fadel fea: I Heeea ard Ae: aprga Feat ISATANA FAA HAL SWeTSeaMa aoe aA 3A: Sweating without source of fire is suitable in diseases of vata enveloped by Medas and Kapha. Nivata sadana — Staying in air tight room, Ayasa — stressful physical activity, Gurupravarana — covering oneself with thick blankets Bhaya — fear, Upanaha — bandaging wrapping with cloth etc. Fighting, wrestling Krodha — anger Bhuripana — excess drinking of water Kshudha — withholding hunger Atapa — Sun exposure — 28-29a Page No. 220 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Sweda phala — Effects of Sweating :- agit: HSS MT aT Geter A a areneqasear arst: Faéea satpes HIS flat: Tea Urey: fereetaec Doshas which have been lubricated by oleation therapy, residing either in the alimentary tract, tissues, or lurking in the channels of the extremities bones etc are liquefied by Sweating therapy, brought into the alimenantray canal to be eliminated out of the body completely, by appropriate purification therapies. So, sweating is done after oleation, but before elimination of Doshas by Panchakarma. 30 Thus ends the chapter Swedavidhi- the Seventeenth of Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 221 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 18 Vamana Virechana Vidhi aaa fatae fafer - Emesis and Purgation Therapies This chapter explains in detail regarding Vamana and Virechana Panchakarma procedures. Who are best suited for these therapies, who are not, what are the signs to observe during the procedure, complications and treatments for such complications. It is the 1g" Chapter of Ashtang Hridya Sutrasthana. It is called as Vamana Virechana Vidhi Adhyaya. ap fata TAet Gary at Hpreracy Vamana — Emesis should be administered for increase of Kapha either alone or in combination with other Doshas where Kapha is predominant. Virechana — purgation should be administered to treat increase of Pitta — alone or in combination with other Doshas where Pitta is predominant. 1 Persons suitable for Vamana procedure — Vamana Arha faveor ¢ aaa AGSRITARTT: Aca SRTSTAE ATT: ProAetaaieuciae SAHA: PARAS TATA AA ETAT ATCA ATOT: Emesis should be administered to persons suffering from Navajwara — fever of recent origin Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery Adha:pitta — Pitta imbalance in lower part of abdomen Pittasruk — Bleeding disorder due to Pitta imbalance Rajayakshma — Chronic Respiratory disorder Kushta — skin diseases Meha — diabetes, urinary tract disorders Apachi, Granthi — Goitre, tumour, fibroid Shleepada — Elephantiasis, Filariasis Unmada — Schizophrenia Kasa — cough, cold Shwasa — Chronic Respiratory tract disease, Asthma Hrullasa — nausea Visarpa — herpes Stanyadosha — vitiated breast milk Urdhvaroga — diseases affected neck and above region 1b-2b Page No. 222 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Persons not suitable for Vamana Panchakarma — Vamana Anarha — Avamya saree aferety war: agit fica: faa: HAF ATA CTA ER ap TAM Sat 3 CAG CTA SAME CTA EASTER: FTEYatt Fort Gaal sicaiseree: SATAATATSLAT ATLA STATAN STO: Ra favershveifavasaaena: Garbhini— The pregnant woman, Rooskha — persons who are dry —not undergone oleation therapy, Kshudhita — hungry, Nitya Dukhita — constantly grief-stricken, children, old persons, Krusha — the emaciated, Sthula — the obese, Hrudrogi — patient of heart disease, Kshata — the wounded, Durbala — weak, debilitated, who are having bouts of vomiting, Pleeha — enlargement of spleen, Timira — blindness, Krimikoshta — intestinal parasites, upward movement of vata and Asra- blood, Soon after administration of Vamana, who have loss of speech, dysuria, Udara — ascites, interstinal obstruction, tumor of the abdomen, who faced difficulties during Vamana therapy, who have strong digestive activity, Arsha — hemorrhoids Urdhva Vata — upward movement of air — reverse peristalisis, Giddiness / Dizziness — enlargement of the prostate, Parshva vata — pain in the flanks and diseases caused by vata; Person suffering from poisoning, indigestion and who have consumed incompatible foods. 3b-6 verdana: od worst aft a tered: walftdsat:, wa cashfeter: Those persons enumerated earlier to praskta vamathu and persons who are suffering from recent fevers are generally to be rejected for therapies ending with dhuma, and those suffering from indigestion from all therapies. Page No. 223 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Virechyah — persons suitable for purgation therapy:- fataaear qoreitiaenicergareacr: ofofsatlarscate nee TaT: fasfieatat ara: oeq: vera: afer: Hom: PHA FT: aac Crt AAT: Mapes: TFALT HSAICAT: Diseases requiring purgation therapy are- Gulma — Tumors of the abdomen, Arsha — Piles, Visphota- blisters, Vyanga — discolored patch on face, Kamala — Jaundice, Liver disease Jeernajwara - Chronic fever, Udara — ascites, interstinal obstruction Poisoning, Chronic poisoning Chardi— Vomiting Pleeha — Disease of the spleen, Splenomegaly, Haleemaka — advanced jaundice, Vidradhi— Abscess Timira — blindness, Kacha, Syanda — Cataract pain in the large intestine, Diseases of male and femal urogenital system wounds/ Ulcers, Vatasra — Gout, Urdhwarakta — bleeding disorders of upper parts of the body (such as nasal bleeding) Diseases of blood vitiation, Mutraghata — Dysuria Shakrut graham — constipation Those persons who are Suitable for emesis therapy- enumerated in earlier verses commencing with “ those suffering from Kustha” are curable- to be treated with purgation therapy. 8-10a Those diseases are - Kushta — skin diseases Meha — diabetes, urinary tract disorders Apachi, Granthi — Goitre, tumour, fibroid Shleepada — Elephantiasis, Filariasis Unmada — Schizophrenia Kasa — cough, cold Shwasa — Chronic Respiratory tract disease, Asthma Hrullasa — nausea Visarpa — herpes Stanyadosha — vitiated breast milk Urdhvaroga — diseases affected neck and above region Page No. 224 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Contra indication for Virechana — Avirechya — Virechana Anarha- a gq tem aasatt HoT ae AMAT AAT AAA AATANT: FTAA ARTA ISOM FETT MANOT: Navajwara — fever of recent origin Alpa Agni -— poor digestive activity, Adhoga Raktapitta — bleeding disease of lower part of the body (such as bleeding per rectum wounds, Ulcers of the rectum Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery Sashalya — foreign bodies; Who have been administered decoction enema, Krurakoshta — Persons who naturally have hard bowel movement, Atisnigdha — who have undergone excess of Oleation treatment Shosha — emaciated 10b-11 Vamana Vidhi- Procedure of emesis therapy:- HT MIR aHret arse acct aerfater waa icrerscath AcTATI Tee La: feet Ged Poltetest Gates Haass faeatteteerset at Cea create PCOIGICC ICE RCRNGIGR GE seus UiReHe ata Ta POUL INCU CCSCCOUGIGS ass fasiss AVSTAT Arafat say TEACAT ATA sTe eae: RI: ASMA TAASULT Wed a: ve Targa AST OTATARTOM ATI TAL qedicaaanay sysatared J te Saat saad syswR ages TATA CIFHETERT TEA % aust sas Hestasd sae Carer Next, during temperate seasons, after administering oleation and sweating therapy properly, on the day previous to the day of emesis, The patient is made sure that he has slept well the previous night. Patient is made sure that his previous food is well digested In the morning of the previous day to Vamana, at first, Auspicious rituals are carried out. Page No. 225 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Next, Kapha Dosha is excited in the patient by administering peya (drink) / thin gruel prepared from fish, Masha (black gram) ,Tila (Sesame) etc. added with little quantity of fats, in morning. On the day of Vamana, again, it is made sure that the patient’s previous food has got digested and he had slept well. He is either maintained on empty stomach or a little quantity of ghee is given. The Aged, children, the debilitated, VIPs and cowards, should be made to drink wine, milk, sugarcane juice or meat juice added with honey and Saindhava salt, appropriate to the disease, to their maximum capacity. Afterwards, determining the nature the nature of his bowels (Intestines — Koshta), the emetic drug is administered sanctifying it with the following hymn- “Let Brahma, Daksa, Ashvinis, Rudra, Indra, the Earth, Moon, Sun, Air, Fire, Sages, comity of herbs, and of living beings protect you; let this medicine be to you like Rasayana for the Sages, Nector for gods and Sudha for the good serpents; Om, Salutations to the medicine.” Uttering these hymns, he should drink the medicine, facing east. 12-18a Note: The medicine given for Vamana depends on the disease. It usually contains Madanaphala (Randia spinosa), Licorice etc. Various combinations of Vamana drugs are discussed in a later chapter. Vamana Vidhi— Procedure of Vamana - AFA: BWageaeaIAHecae eda: FETS HAE aAleleT Age HAT Mea ease IM AUGeeeL Tay Wael WGccea STrepeareey erat: 38 ued cere wT aaa oA After consuming the medicine, he should await for one Muhurta — 48 minutes for the commencement of vomiting, with keen intent. With the appearance of oppression in the chest and salivation he should try to vomit If the bouts are not coming up easily, he should tickle his throat either with his fingers or a soft tube without injuring the throat, Sitting on a seat of the height of one knee, the bouts of vomiting should be held supported by another person. His umbilical region and back should be massaged in upward direction. 18-21la ap dtestteornga:: fect carefeathicr ae Rasarecerat: GYSe AeA ath Page No. 226 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan In case of increase of Kapha, vomiting should be induced with drugs having properties like penetrating, hot and Pungent (Teekshna, Ushna, Katu); In case of Pitta with drugs of sweet and cold properties and In case of association of Vata with Kapha, with drugs of Unctuous, sour and salt properties. (Snigdha Amla Lavana) 21b-22a caer ater BWacdal aT VaSAUY sae 22 Vomiting should be allowed till the appearance- coming out of Pitta or complete expelling of Kapha. 22b eras: Sores ark: aavtakh: aacyat: Yet: eae) If bouts are insufficient, they should be induced again and again by drinking water boiled with Kana, Dhatri, Siddhartha and salt. (long pepper, Amla, White mustard and black salt) aa areata dary Wgicd: Uidaeur a hareatsaes TI arierecet ferscranugnlosared: Less bouts — Ayoga - Non — commencement of bouts, bouts coming on with hindrance or elimination of the medicine only- are the features of Ayoga- inadequate bouts; from it arise, excess of expectoration, itching, appearance of skin rashes, fever etc. 23b-24 Proper bouts — Samyak Yoga - fafdaett waded awpitcdietet: HAL Fat: Wale: FaeLS Waele T Cas sd anticraatanen 7 afte czar were arr Kapha, Pitta and vata coming out in successive order, without any hindrance, calmness of the mind and cessation of vomit bouts on its own, absence of features of inadequate bouts and feeling of not too much of discomfort are the features of samyagyoga- proper bout.25a afar qf thereat afc eA ale: HVSRTEAAY aA: URI ay sear acy straenterer ferereretrey In Atiyoga- excess bouts the vomited materials will be frothy, with glistering particles and blood; Page No. 227 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The patient will experience weakness, burning sensation, dryness of the throat, giddiness, powerful disease of vata origin and even death due to discharge of life supporting blood. 25b-26 Care after vomiting therapy - Vamanottara Upachara- Braeaes aa AT sae TAA Gaara THIRTY 2 After the patient had proper bouts of vomiting, he should be comforted with encouraging words, made to inhale any one kinds of smoke (Dhuma)- mild, medium, or strong, and then allowed to follow the regimen of after-care of oleation therapy. 27 ae: ART: THA ST eae] FAA: FEET Then, either in the evening or next morning, after feeling hungry, after bath with warm water, he can eat mass prepared with red rice or if he not feeling hungry he should adhere to the following regimen of Peya (Thin gruel) etc. 28 This regimen is called as Samsarjana Karma. Samsarjana — Peyadi Ahara Karma- Regimen of liquid Diet - tar facta pt a ay ce Aer ate PAT AAT AY HraHlee] WUMTACATA YATES: Persons who have had the maximum, medium and minimum purificatory therapies, should consume Peya- thin Gruel, Vilepi- thick Gruel, Akruta Yusa- soup not processed with fat, salt, sours etc. Krutayusa- Soup processed with fat, salt and Sours and Rasa- meat juice- in Successive order, for three, two and one Annakala- time of meal respectively. 29 Note: Eating periods = Anna Kala. Each day has two anna kala. — morning and evening. If the maximum vomiting bouts were observed (Ati Yoga), Then, the patient should take Peya, Vilepi, Akruta Yusha, Kruta Yusha and Mamsarasa — three eating periods (Annakala) each. The patient will not have any food except these. Likewise, for the medium vomiting bouts, the number of eating periods Is two each and for lesser bouts (Heena Yoga), the number of eating periods (Anna kala) is one each. Page No. 228 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Benefits of Samsarjana Karma — wean aOR: quatAaed: AeyeaAy sat HAT Hert fer: wareedda yas tanfaeRecniser: Just as a spark of fire after being fed by grass, powder of dry cow dung etc, gets augmented gradually and becomes great, steady, and capable of burning everything, similarly, the internal digestion fire, by the Samsarjana regimen, in the patient who has undergone Vamana karma, gains strength. 30 Vega Samkhya- Mana- Number of Bouts and quantity:- THUTAIIR J MAA Fel THet GSset ava a aati fate weaccen earecitagres 38 For Vamana, Heenayoga — Minimum bouts — 4 bouts Madhyama vega — Moderate — 6 bouts Atiyoga — Maximum bouts — 8 bouts For Virechana — Heenayoga — 10 bouts of purgation or half prastha of purgated material (384 grams) Madhyamayoga — 20 bouts — | prastha of material (768 grams) Atiyoga — 30 bouts. — 2 prastha (1,536 grams). 31 acca qact fetaad, Heed 7 faxararg: afaatet UlscHrersete deter AY fat, aH g faq Vomiting therapy is allowed till the expulsions of pitta or half of purgations Purgation therapy is allowed till Kapha comes out; Measurement to be done after rejecting 2 — 3 bouts, containing faeces in case of Vamana and after rejecting the medicine- emetic Drug in case of Vamana. 32 Virechana Vidhi- Purgation therapy procedure - siet afad a: mertaronieaa HHT WA Bic ASS Halas 33 After Vamana therapy, patient is given Samsarjana regimen. After that, he is again given Snehana and Swedana treatment. After that, in the morning, after Kapha time has lapsed (after around 9 — 10 am,) Virechana drug should be given. should be given the Purgation medicine. The kind and quantity of purgation medicine should be determining the nature of his Kostha (alimentary tract, bowels). 33 Page No. 229 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan aghicat Ag: wise: aire fatteact WaT AST: HL: Hegel aTaTes ATT A person with Mrudukoshta (soft intestines), even milk will induce purgation. For a person with Krurakoshta, (hard bowels, intestines), even Trivrit (a purgative herb) might cause purgation with great difficulty. 34 erat: ed fate:, age: ath Reaceitsorerattarat For Pitta disease, Kashaya — astringent and Madhura — sweet drugs should be used for purgation. For Kapha disease, Katu (pungent) herbs should be given for purgation. For Vata, drugs with Snigdha — unctuous, oily, Ushna (hot) and Lavana (salt) taste b given to induce purgation. 35 sdedt ¢ eA c 2 STFA, FACAGET TTA eA If bouts of purgation do not commence, he should drink hot water and his abdomen should be fomented with warmed with palms of the hand. 36a SeMe Hed et AAeca HAY: Ya: Ta HESEACHISET Rraqed eenea: se searepeced: Telerae eae ait qroncier Tae aaa Tf, on the day of consuming the purgative drug, the patient responds poorly, he should be allowed to take his food on that day and the purgative drugs administered again on the next day; Persons who have unstable and unlubricated alimentary tract, should consume the purgative drugs after ten days — during which Snehana and sweating therapies should be done because the body which has been well prepared with Snehana and sweating therapies, will be able to have purgation properly; then the purgative drug should be administered after considering all aspects and remembering the procedures described earlier . 36b-38a Vishama Yogah — Abnormal bouts:- Rap Heyeerdecrerew: LISA: 3¢ ausiders: Titer: tera arafasag: sraerere ora Bet auiesy aatfeatet 38 facticaawnady fer-qay paca Page No. 230 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan fereosaticdaadh Md HOT Aeileae vo A Uaetea al Aa: Wea at Foie ALOT PSOTSTAY AAWATTA ve died sfafaReaea aa sfctaaenaa: Ayoga — lesser quantity of purgation - Discomfort in the region of the heart and abdomen, Aruchi — anorexia, Too much of Kapha and Pitta increase in the intestines (because they are not properly thrown out of the body) or expulsion of Doshas coming out through the mouth, Kandu — itching, Vidaha — burning sensation, Pitika — eruption on the skin, Peenasa — rhinitis, Vata Vidgraha — blocking of flatus and constipation are the features of Ayoga- inadequate bout of purgation therapy; opposite of these are the features of proper bouts; In case of Atiyoga — excess bouts After the elimination of faeces, Pitta, Kapha and vata in Succeeding order, there will be elimination of watery material which does not contain Kapha or Pitta, which is white, black or slightly red in color, resembling the water in which meat has been washed or resembling a piece of fat; prolapse of the rectum, thirst, giddiness Sunken eyes and diseases caused by excess of vomiting- will appear. 40-42 aeaaneratad oT qAeledea Uertat qnasta fatter act afercartera HA oM eT oo Hot Tepes, The person who has undergone proper purgation therapy, should administered all other therapies, except inhalation of smoke, which are described under emesis therapy; afterwards he should stick to the regimen of diet, in the same way as of emesis therapy and then resume his normal food. 42- 43 Hecqaeaaaygaanat arg Tor sevcsvifasat oT asters Paeedalualcrernasahfea T sere On the day of consuming the purgation, If the patient has weak digestion strength (Mandagni), coated feeling in the gut, and if the digestion symptoms of previous food are not seen, the he should be made to fast. By this fasting he will not be harmed by the discomfort caused by the obstruction of Doshas, aggravated by oleation, Sweating therapies. 44-45a Page No. 231 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Ueaatead ASAE HA TaeAraT, The digestive activity becomes weak by purification therapies, blood letting, oleation and fasting; hence the regimen of Peya- thin Gruel etc. should be followed. 45b-46a FaeaA aT AETt area eta tar a Teacas atonewaAt fea: Peya should not be given when only little quantities of Pitta and Kapha are expelled out, to the person is Addicted to wine, and in whom Vata and Pitta are Predominant; for them regimen of Tarpana etc. — nourishing therapy are suitable. 46b-47a MIF Tet Act TeAATe ata fagtcanaeaa: We at ofaoreata Vamana (Emesis) brings out Doshas which are not cooked (processed by heat) Whereas Virechana (purgation) brings out the Doshas which have undergone Paka (cooking- process by heat); hence in case of emesis — the physician need not await Doshapaka (cooking of the Doshas). 47 aan agree alyareat B: FaTL fakead tecdtsiteqaraadd Person who is weak, who has great amount of increased Doshas develops purgation on his own — without consuming purgative Drug; he should be treated with foods which are purgative. 48. Gao: ena: Yaaorarr: Hell ae: soRaraatrord PeeycaorasteTay RR carpet AAI REALM NMAC TACT Yat: Gat: GIST FaraToae, HeIPAcTaey Persons who are weak, who have undergone purification therapy previously, who have little amount of imbalanced Doshas, who are emaciated and whose nature of the alimentary tract is not known should be given mild purgative drug in a small dose; It is better given in small doses often; Large dose given once creates doubt of death; The drug in small and repeated doses will eliminate the circulating Doshas little by little; in a weak person, little quantity of Doshas should only be mitigated by mild drugs, they need not be expelled out by purification therapies . 49b-51 erated FAL ct fe seaderaterec: Page No. 232 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Doshas which are more in quantity trouble the person greatly and even kill him, if not expelled out- by purification therapies. Aeciite RAIS T Maatye: Hefei fafsrcaward TF wert Person who have weak digestion strength, Krura koshta — hard bowels (hard natured alimentary tract), should be administered ghee processed with Kshara and Lavana (Alkalis and salts), to Augment his digestive capacity and Vanquish Kapha and Vata; afterwards he should be given purification therapies. 52 Parag fee p THI ocaATAM era acacia a asssafarda skifa weal aed GU aeaieda: fearser Tatar apices a Reatracdeontar: woratctter: ged fe aot Reset fata fretcqaey In persons who are Rooksha (dry), who have great increase of Vata, who have hard natured Alimentary tract (Krura koshta), who do exercise regularly and who have strong digestion strength, the purgative drug gets digested without producing purgation; for them, an enema should be given first and then purgative drug which is Snigdha — (unctuous, oily) should be given or the faeces should be removed first by using a strong rectal suppository made from fruits; the Doshas thus initiated in their movement, the purgative drug expels them easily. 53-55 farrtreraticarproitntaaren: PAA TVSA Aree Tee Fee Walel Telefon, wate Treeisarey Persons who are suffering from poison , Abhighata (Trauma), Pitika(skin eruption), Kushta — skin diseases, Shopha (inflammation), Visarpa- herpes, Kamala (Jaundice), Anaemia and Diabetes, should be given the purgative therapy without too much of Snehana (oleation. Mild oleation itself is sufficient for them. All of them should be given fatty purgatives; those who have had oleation earlier should be given dry- non- fatty purgatives. 56 HAT THA YALE HAT eaerddhassid, Sead THT A Note: Virechana is of two types. Snigdha Virechana and Rooksha Virechana. Snigdha Virechana- done by fatty purgative, such as a castor oil. Or the fatty material is mixed with herbs. Such as Castor oil mixed with Haritaki. Rooksha Virechana — wherein dry purgative herb alone is given. For example, Trivrit Lehyam. Page No. 233 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Het fe cgigercrsa feat areal cer Taeraecaanicras|e: Mead erereteter: Doshas getting loosened from the body by oleation and Sweating therapies are expelled out by purification therapies just like the dirt from the cloth — by washing. 58 Pera UeT PA Bevet FT a: are osm gare eye cer eet The body of the person who resorts to purification therapies without undergoing oleation and Sweating habitually, gets broken just like a log of dry wood while being bent. Shodhana Phala- benefits of Purification therapies:- GEIS SAHA KAM MAeed SaeteeT atic Peter Wes aaa: AMA Heller TTT ATTA Clarity of the mind, strength of the sense organs, stability of the tissues, keenness of digestive power and slow ageing occur from purification therapies, properly undertaken. 60 Thus ends the chapter- Vamana Virechana Vidhi- The eighteenth in Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 234 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 19 Vasti Vidhi act aféa fafér - Enema Therapy This chapter explains the procedure of Basti treatment. Basti in general means enema therapy. This is the 19" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, called as Basti Vidhi Adhyaya, written by Sri Vagbhata, son of Sri Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. adieatry atey ard at ateahead STHAMT HIST BT srarvhiieataered a: ¢ Basti is described for diseases with imbalanced Doshas having predominance of Vata or for diseases with Vata imbalance alone, It is the best among all treatments. It is of three kinds- viz Niruha also known as Asthapana Basti Decoction enema decoction mixed with salt, honey, ghee etc is administered. Anuvasana also known as snehabasti ghee, oil, fat etc are administered. Herbal oils such as Narayana Taila, Herbal ghritas are more commonly used for this purpose. Uttarabasti administered through urethral route. 1 Notes- Basti means urinary bladder. In ancient times urinary bladder of animals like buffalo etc were used as a bag to hold the enema material like decoctions, oil etc. Persons suitable for decoction enema -Asthapya Asthapana Arha at aera HOTTA TA ATA HT fe AAT TCTEL Patients suffering from Gulma — Tumors of the abdomen Anaha — bloating, fullness Khuda — gout, Pleeha Disease of the spleen, Splenomegaly Page No. 235 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shuddha atisara — Diarrhoea unassociated with other diseases Shula pain abdomen Jeernajwara - Chronic fever Pratishyaya rhinitis Shukra, Anila, Mala Graha — obstruction of semen, flatus and constipation, Vardhma — enlargement of the scrotum, Ashmari Urinary calculi, Rajonasha — Amenorrhoea and grevious diseases of vata origin. 2-3 Unsuitable for Niruha — Asthapana Anarha — Anasthapyah SAMA SATE: ATAREHT Her Per: STAT SAAT] AYal Sccletraet: PATTI ie eae ATA ET: era: HaTeRt wafeanlaniatt art og aye T Ae aed aT TCH Atisnigdha whu have had excess of oleation therapy; Urakshata - Chest injury Krusha — highly emaciated, Ama Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery due to Ama or diarrhea of recent onset, ‘Vami — vomiting, Samshuddha — who have undergone purification therapies (Panchakarma), Datta Navana — who have been administered nasal medication Shvasa COPD, Asthma, Dyspnoea Kasa — cough, cold Praseka excessive salivation Arsha — Hemorrhoids Hidhma — Hiccups Adhmana Adbominal bloating Alpavahni- low digestion strength Shunapayu Swelling in the rectum Kruta Ahara Who have just taken food Badhodara intestinal obstruction Chidra Udara Intestinal rupture Udakodara Ascites Kushta — skin diseases Madhumeha diabetes Pregnant woman in the seventh month. 4-5 Page No. 236 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Patients suitable for Anuvasana Basti Anuvasana Arha — Anuvasya FRU Vs a Heqarea favrsreitaera: Ba: haea ATA: Person suitable for Asthapana are suitable for oil enema (Anuvasana). Especially those who have strong digestion power, who are dry not undergone Snehana therapy and those suffering from diseases of vata. 6 Patients not suitable for Anuvasana — Nanuvasyh Anuvasana Anarha AIT Va T XY HARMCAAM Tog AS TTT: fetorat colle tasaieenisonHlad: afrsateaaeeeyrpaAn algae: are fas ay arreaw eciad) areraesatey Persons unsuitable for oil enema are all those unsuitable for decoction enema, those suffering from Pandu — anemia, Kamala — Jaundice, Meha — diabetes, urinary tract disorders Peenasa — rhinitis Niranna on empty stomach Pleeha Disease of the spleen, Splenomegaly Vid bhedi — diarrohea, Guru koshta — hard bowels- constipated, Kaphodara — Kapha type of Ascites Abhishyandi a type of eye disorder Bhrusha Sthula — profound obesity, Krumi Koshta — Intestinal worm infestation Adhyamaruta — gout; Who have consumed poison, those suffering from artificial poison, goiter, filariasis and scrofula. 7-8 Bastinetra enema nozzle- aeaed at sariearqarderavpsrey MYPCSHRAPC SALAS, THETA Enema nozzle should be made from metals like gold, silver, wood, bone or bamboo; Gopuchhakara — resembling the tail of the cow in shape, Achidra — without holes (except at the ends), smooth, straight and with Gulikamukha — tip shaped like a pill. 9 Page No. 237 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Be Hee UST, OT HSA HsaToMfey Ve Bayt Aa, Tessel cara, ss aa qarata We fender aieay a aateeentniet yarorarraga For children less than lyear of age, nozzle should be five angula- fingers breadth of Patients own finger in length; 1 — Tyears of age, it should be 6 angula; 7 year it should be 7 Angula, 12 years 8 Angula 16 years 9 Angula 20 years and onwards it should be 12 Angulas only. These measurements may be slightly increased for those of other age groups based on age, strength and body build. 10-11 TaSSOat TH Al FUletesd afersour WF sec age dealers st WA fae Ae HT aed I aa Feat AS Hors a fro ahetyh ATL Its orifice at its root should be 1 Angula in diameter for children of one year of age. Diameter of the orifice should be increased by 2 angula for different age groups and its maximum is 3 Angula diameter. At its tip, the orifice should allow free movement of soaked Mudga (green gram), Masha (black gram), Kalaya (round pea) and seed of Karkandhu Jujube respectively. 12-13 FeeagMaat Weck afeaa ota aeat He fect, Aer aes SISTA Near the office at its root, a Karnika- ear-like ridge of this same size of the orifice should be constructed - at the time of preparing the nozzle, another second Karnika- ridge should be made at a distance of two Angula- towards its tip, the orifice at the tip should be kept closed- with a plug of cloth.14-15. Basti Putaka- Enema bag:- a 7 aera sonfanteuraant afd qayied req HUA fea TMT TA TEA HASHING A KUAAT HAT Teva Page No. 238 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Urinary bladder of goat, sheep, buffalo or other animals was used as enema bag. The bladder should be sturdy, well beaten, made red by tanning with astringent substances. The bladder should be devoid of holes, hard spots. It should not be torn. To such a bladder, big end of the nozzle is adjusted and tied with threads. If the bladder is not available, skin of thigh and legs of animals or thick cloth may be utilized for making the bag. 15-17 Niruha Matra (quantity of medicine for decoction enema):- feOgATa WIA WHS THT WA wEraghe: Waist Wacvewgdeda: wad aeAQeS GaTaMserawea aq HCAARE Ale, atta WaT: WA For a child upto | year age, the decoction enema quantity is | prakuncha = | Pala = 48g. For each succeeding year it should be increased by | pala till it becomes six Prasruta- 12 pala =576g; So fora 12 year old, the quantity is 12 Pala. Further on it should be in increased by one Prasruta (2 Palas= 96 g). Each year till it becomes twelve Prasta- 24 Palas=1152g. At the 18 years, it is 24 Pala. 18 — 70 years — 24 Pala. After 70 years, 10 Prasruta = 20 Pala = 960 grams / ml118-19 Anuvasana Matra- quantity for oil enema:- wares reser Tel ATA aepaTaey The quantity for oil enema should be one fourth of the quantity of that of decoction enema, as prescribed for each age group. 20 Anuvasana Vidhi procedure of fat Enema:- area Setfect acct Te asta Yat: seanengé rare YaAareparaa, fa aed a fear wat Hfteaal steerer UAHA ect oY HEPUSAARN Ae Farle a Prasat Ardara greet we Page No. 239 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan areafesd at dredre Biase ateraeda: The person suitable for decoction enema should be administered Snehana (oleation) and sweating therapy followed by purification therapy- emesis or purgation. Afier he regains strength, determining that he is fit for oil enema, he should be given an oil enema first. The following procedure is adopted. During cold season (Hemanta and Shishira Ritus) and Vasanta (spring) it should be given during day in other seasons during night. He should be given oil massage and bath, then accustomed food, less by one fourth of the usual quantity; satiable, light- easily digestible neither with more of fats nor very dry, followed by an after-drink of appropriate liquid. Next he should walk for some time, eliminate faeces and urine and lie on a comfortable cot, neither too high nor too low, on his left side, folding his right thigh, and extending the left thigh. 20-23 sR aa wore ferry ae SeoaeN aeAdaal TS SEAAHF TAT qed uf dat afagatdatraray afdast a at Arg Ape wis made a pata ary: ae fF favoiet Next, the enema nozzle which is Lubricated, after the air inside the bag is expelled out, confirming that it is well fastened to the nozzle, it should be pressed without shaking the hands, in the direction of the vertebral column, neither too fast nor too slow, neither with great force nor with low pressure but in one attempt, a little quantity of liquid material be allowed to remain in the bag. 24-26 aed Aeaereees Uva arsdicewatl aca aM wat Teas Perea dd: WaRasares Boer ea aTSetas MeraMeaed Ht T KATIA AAT aaaraiafea Feret a fe efter ferada aise: efte fetged seu: celal aifesorcrentac aealiset cAI Aer slseoky After the administration and removing the nozzle the person should be placed with his face upwards, his buttocks beaten gently by by the hands of the physician, then by patients own heels; the foot of the cot should be lifted up thrice; Next he must lie extending the entire body, with a pillow under his heels, oil should be smeared all over the body and all the parts of it beaten with fist or massaged, concentrating on the painful areas of the body, so that the fat enema liquid inside the rectum does not come out soon. Page No. 240 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan If it comes out soon, another oil enema should be administered immediately because fat which does not remain inside does not serve the purpose. If the person has good digestive activity, and if the fat comes out after the stipulated time he can be given light food in the evening. 27- 29 2. fetgfectepret: URASAA BAe: WL The maximum time for the fat to come out is three Yama- nine hours; after that, it can be awaited for one day and night; later on, after 24 hours after administration, attempt should be made to remove it by force, with the help of rectal suppositories made from fruits or strong decoction enema. 30-31 aerlemeasresct Usorsenieatp saada fe aategwave ferent Try Weare: AIST, haga aT If it does not come out due to severe dryness inside and does not produce any troubles like lassitude etc. it should be neglected and allowed to remain inside for the night; Next morning he is made to drink warm water either processed with ginger and coriander or plain. 32 srarteqat fet wT ar yereT aay Again he should be given fat enema on the third or fifth day, or till the fat gets well digested; To whom fat enema can be given daily? Ua a SUA: FAME HT eaTALSAey caATAecae Arasetley TANT WFAA Those who have profound increased of vata, who do exercises- Physical activities daily, who have good digestive power and those who are very dry can be given fat enema daily. 33-34 sia eieferadt: Raed atcitaeet free eelet oalaiearsey eel Celt: After 3 — 4 such fat enemas if the body is found to be well lubricated, purification decoction enema should be administered next, to clear the channels, if not well lubricated, fat enema only should be continued. 35 Page No. 241 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Niruha Basti Vidhi- Procedure of decoction enema:- asaa Her qe ar eae are erst Feared Ppiradargedt Wrasse UA AACA aA era HAT FET ares TE ated wataedautdalactsgit: ae On the fifth or third day- after fat enema, at an Auspicious time, some time after midday, after performing Auspicious rites, after oleation and Sweating, after elimination of wastes- urine, faeces after not taking a heavy meal after a light meal ., after carefully considering the nature of the person patient, the Doss, Drugs etc, the physician, accompanied by many experts of the enema therapy, should administer decoction enema to the patient. 36- 37 2 Nirahadraya Kalpana preparation of enema decoction:- waretafdaferet gerearsel went a ad: Farrer qaredr ae Ta THeoy acd Faed T Wworravesner Hy af aaa Uses Hei Hongda a a4 ASSAM TA: WIA TSET T AyIeaTeIsT FT Fra 20 Pala- (960 g) of Drugs- enumerated in the prescription and 8 Madana Phala fruits should be made into a decoction with the 16 parts of water (15.360 liters) and boiled down to 1/4" quantity; Thus, 3.840 liters of decoction will be obtained. To the decoction, is added a fat- oil, ghee ete in 1/4" quantity = 960 g, for treatment of Vata, 1/6" quantity = 640 g for the treatment of Pitta, v/s" quantity = 480 g for healthy person and for the treatment of Kapha disorders. The quantity of Kalka (Paste) of some Drugs to be added to the decoction for all Doshas and the healthy person shall be 1/8" part of the decoction (480 g) neither too thin nor too thick after mixing. Next one pala (48 g) of Guda- Molasses/ jaggery and appropriate quantity of honey and salt also are also added. SOTEG HRA Ac GoRAATETA wiace aect worecarat arcasorettcrery afaterset af at Gat afacdtevt af at Ag ACSA S AMAA ATE aA U Page No. 242 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan All these are then mixed together, churned well with a churner and made warm by keeping its container either in hot water or by steam from a pot. It should then be filled into the enema bag in that condition, which is neither too hot nor too cold, neither too fatty nor too dry, neither too strong nor mild, neither too thick nor too thin, neither too much nor too less in quantity, neither with too much of salt nor with it is then pushed into the rectum. 41-43 arat Pafcrent paicereeariatenat: yeh weg after TaeY Heresy Baga MMO Gener ar Hea Some other experts of enema therapy say that the quantity of fats- oil, ghee and honey should be three pala (144 g) individually; Quantity of Manimantha (Saindhava salt) for healthy will be half a Karsha — 6 grams, the Kalka- paste of drugs be two Pala 96 g and of all the other liquids put together shall be 10Pala- 480 g. 44-44, Aah AA Tle Hoh FHAAA Hae ysl Bata fereeronay Taltotey Pater: | Honey, salt, fat, paste and decoction are to be mixed in successive order, one after the other; This shall be the method of mixing the materials for decoction enema. 45 '2 Sematt SeaATS Xf ewe eH HAT PAI: AradsaeadHeH: Fst After receiving the enema, the patient should lie with his face upward with a pillow under his head, mentally intent of the enema; after getting the urge he should eliminate the faeces sitting on his heels. 46 atatat Wa: Frey Aect Ata WA Tae Trg aKa era cand Rearsadievisor starve wise faalcnadtd at Caaatarearfe a The maximum time for decoction enema material to come out is one Muhurta- 48 minutes, after that period it may be fatal; Hence another purgative enema prepared with fats, Alkalies, Urine of animals like the cow and sour substances and possessing unctuous, Penetrating and hot properties should be administered immediately; or a rectal suppository prepared from fruits should be made use of; Sweating therapy and frightening should also be resorted to, to induce defecation. 47-48 12 Page No. 243 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan vara faqed J afadret afeatead Ae se ager sf orager eferecat If the materials comes out on its own accord, then second, third or fourth enema can be given or as many as required till he developed symptoms of proper enema therapy. 49 faRecaea aterdtieacard, The symptoms of bouts of decoction enema therapy are similar to those of purgation therapy. 49 LA ant g sierrt HAT ARNOT Cale aerate] fart & feces safer waelatet: a Geogr oled arid: a After the appearance of the decided symptoms, the patient should take a bath with warm water, and eat rice mass along with juice of animals of desert- like land. The complications of decoction enema caused by the circulating Malas Doshas will subside by warm water bath and food. HY arenige spa: Wes Vara If the patient becomes troubled by increased Vata he should be given a fat enema immediately on the Same day. 50-52 Teese AT EY: Certara The symptoms of proper, inadequate and excess- decoction enema therapy are the same as those of Snehana (drinking of fat) therapy. Signs of good Anuvasana basti Procedure — Hira art excl wea AAs fetal ssi A stefoiter sifetor: Tele: Tel Re STITT | Enema material — fat coming out along with faeces after staying inside for a short time, followed by flatus moving down are the symptoms of proper fat enema therapy .53 eh Atel oT Soe I lee, THOT GT A Aa a cd, aaHraer a Hferer Gaede HATA GEM Act: Page No. 244 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 1 —3 fat enema (Anuvasana) should be administered for the treatment of Kapha dominant diseases. 5 —7 for Pitta, 9-11 for Vata. Again on uneven alternative days- third, Fifth, seventh etc. decoction enema should be given. 54- 55 Note — Always, Niruha Basti = decoction enema is given in empty stomach. Anuvasana basti— fat enema is given soon after taking food, when the palms of the patient is still wet due to hand wash, after food intake. (Ardra Pani Avastha) apftcdterersdet YI: HAT Food should be given along with Anna Yusha (Soup prepared with rice, grains) in case of Kapha disorder Milk, in case of Pitta disorder and Meat juice / Meat soup in case of Vata disorder. 55 4 acecttratersearitagatetaac: afeatat afetct Rersa: Earqarcteot Taira: In case of increased of Vata, one enema consisting of decoction of drugs which mitigate Vata, Trivrt, Saindhava Mixed with fats, Liquids of sweet and sour taste, made warm and administered will be ideal. 56 qaateniesrorerarerssrarie AAT fed tagigat aroveieearterat In case of increase of Pitta, one enema consisting of decoction of drugs of Nyagrodhadi gana and Padmakadi gana made sweet and cold and mixed with ghee, milk , sugarcane juice and honey will be ideal. FRA fe fet aT AA Ae AAT: war: Bailgaiearedteuisorencar: ath In case of increase of Kapha, three enemas consisting of decoction of drugs of Argwadhadi gana, and Vastakadi gana mixed with honey, cow urine, possessing penetrating, hot and pungent properties is ideal. 58 Tae Betas SAT ater cafe Ua: HATA In case of increase of all the Doshas together, these three kinds of enema will bring down the Doshas for which another enema need to be given with drugs of all the above mentioned qualities. 60 Page No. 245 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Rea: W atandeecarcsed Pataca: a fe aweagel afta yada ao ofa Other physicians do not desire any enema other than these three because there is no fourth dosha for which another enema need to be given. SHAM arent GUSTO ere HAT Raa aowicsRattcaed aft waara Yet others say that only three kinds of enema are to be prepared, Utkleshana - that causing of the Doshas, Shodhana - that causing purification, by expelling the Doshas and Shamana — that causing mitigation subsiding them inside the body. 61 All these are to be justified on the basis of strength of the Doshas, drugs etc. weashawctest Fardeen frac tt Administration of enemas should be continued till symptoms of proper enema are obtained. Karma Basti — treatment with 30 enemas Weele Uh: Usaed caeMeMtenter a arate pia seaaeaediar: A course of 30 enemas with one fat enema at the beginning and five at the end, with twelve decoction enema and twelve fat enema alternately in the middle is called as Karma basti. 63 Here, each day, one enema is usually given. Some expert doctors may give two enemas per day. But one enema per day is the common standard F = Fat enema = Anuvasana = Snehabasti D = Decoction enema = Niruha = Asthapana 1=F 2=F 3=D 4=F 5=D 6=F 7=D 8=F 9=D j10=F 11=D 12=F |13=D |14=F |IS5S=D |16=F 17=D |I8=F |19=D 20=F 21=D 22=F 23=D 24=F 25=D 26=F 27=F 28=F 29=F B0=F Page No. 246 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kala Basti — 15 enema regimen are: UsTagtar HF We Teel Hed TAA Ye UWddtcded Xe: A course of 15 enemas, with one fat enema at the beginning and three at the end, with six decoction enemas and five fat enema alternately in the middle- is known as Kala Basti. 64 1=F 2=D B=F 4=D [=F 6=D 7=F 8=D 9=F 10=D J1=F 12=D 13=F |14=F |1S5S=F Yogabasti — 8 day enema regimen - ait set sect st Far ferwel: FAIA Leteraretecaresit A course of eight enemas, with one fat enema both at the beginning and at the end, with three decoction enema and three fat enema alternately in the middle is known as- yoga basti. Sneha Basti - Niruha Basti Taediee fees at seararieefrarel &4 serosal TreleteseAval Aa aealieates: Tie: afr E ATA: &g reas sere Paras Either fat enema or decoction enema alone should not be administered. More of fat enema may cause nausea and loss of digestion strength. More of decoction enema may cause fear of increase of Vata. Hence those who are given decoction enema should also be given fat enema and those who are given fat enema should also be given decoction enema; Enema therapy will balance the three Doshas only when it is both /ubricatingand purifying. 65- 661/2 Matra Basti — Low dose fat enema — exaa TASUTAET Aaa Asa: AA: [ls ll Aravatea: Ae: Fig: Fat enema consisting of fat quantity equivalent to the minimum quantity of fat used for Snehakarma is known as Matra Basti. In practice, a very low dose of medicated oil or ghee — 50 — 75 ml is administered as Matra Basti. Page No. 247 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan tects: Wet a UT Tega eas Neca rae: FAT ATA eSATA TART: alseat fISaERT Tea: ECA: TT: It should be used always for Bala — children, Vriddha — the aged, Adhva, Bhara, Stri, Vyayama — who are habituated to long walking, carrying heavy weight, sexual activity and exercise Chinta — who think too much, who are suffering from- diseases of vata, fractures, debility, poor who are digestive activity, for kings, wealthy persons and persons who live happily. It conquers the Doshas, does not need strict regimen, gives strength, eliminates the wastes- faeces, urine etc. easily and is comfortable. 67-69 Uttarabasti- urethral and vaginal enema/ douche:- aect Wry ater aierrsteay 7 SfeaeaTae esa factargat ety In diseases of the urinary bladder and of vagina and uterus in women, uttarabasti should be administered, to those who have purified by two or three decoction enemas, per rectum. 70 MNS AA ee Aeelst FATES Ged aigewararneaat: aperenforaey PrariHraenast waeur Sareea PRIA: Taqedss Cr The nozzle should be 12 Angula in length, in terms of patients own fingers, round- tubular resembling a cow’s tail at its end should have an orifice of mustard size. It should be made of gold, silver etc metals, it should be smooth, resembling the stalk of flowers such as Kunda, Ashvamara and sumanas. It should be strong. 71-72 wee aftageqarar eaferateaet a The enema liquid should be mild in strength, light- easily acting, its quantityone Sukti- 24 g or lesser. Page No. 248 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Uttarabasti Vidhi Procedure:- BY CaaNaeared Freaeaaetera: aor: Yarafasces Hs separa Fat ese Ag ad dso eet: atctfayed SEAT Meet TATA we seater Aged ATT fsHed ede: Wisa seaeia ere weateawat fea: Next the patient who has been given bath and food in accordance with the regimen prescribed for fat enema, should one’s knees, this penis should be held straight- by the physician and a thin probe should be slowly inserted the by the physician and a thin probe should be slowly inserted into the urethra to clear the channel; after thus clearing the passage, the enema nozzle should be inserted along the line of the Suture, to the entire length of the Urethal passage- till the cavity of the urinary bladder is reached, without shaking and the enema bag pressed just as described for rectal enema, pushing the fat-0 oil, ghee etc. into the urinary bladder; this is the ideal method- for a urethral enema. 73-75 12 aaa fattar aearaieag a a sears TaAATES Flea, In this manner three or four enemas should be given; all other procedures- after care, food etc. are planned similar to that of fat enema therapy. 76-76 erariaaret J abferfeareaarge: faatia cet AeATeqaraty area Mafasienpery arearayrat For women, Vaginal/ Uterine enema- douche should be administered during the Menstrual period only for, it is only then that it- uterus is without its closure material; it can be given even apart from the menstrual period, in emergency. In diseases such as prolapsed and pain of the uterus or Vagina, in other diseases of uterus and vagina and in menorrhagia. 77-78 at SMS AIA TAS SISTA Utst Fae, Fash FpacHtet FAPCOAARG, Tele CAHASIITA VEE 3 sia The nozzle- for this enema should be ten Angulas in length, permitting the entry of a grain of Mudga- green gram, it should inspected to a length of four Angula in case of vaginal passage and to a length of two Angula in case of urethral passage in diseases like Dysuria etc. and in case of children it shall be one Angulas. 79 WHod ACTA AT, Tele eieRadléo ll Page No. 249 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The medium quantity of enema is one prakunca Pala=48 g and for children one Sukti- half Pala=24 g only 80 Scare: WAM: HAH UsHler Users SEGMEAETTATANTAT Arse, aRaRAd 7 weaat radar qaeha a fear CSIR Bcd The women, who is lying on a cot with her face upwards, and legs folded at the knees and kept erect, should be administered, the Vaginal/ Urethal enema, three or four times in a day and night; it should be continued for three days only increasing the quantity of fat enema liquid daily; After a gap three days it should be administered again for another three days. 81-82 Samanya Bastikala- periods of administration of enema generally :- vareiavar afta aa: vated freee | Meat Presa slearea: Ueware farted: Nil Purgation therapy should be resorted to after a fortnight after emesis therapy and decoction enema after a fortnight after purgation therapy, Fat enema- therapy should be administered immediately after decoction enema but after seven days after purgation therapy. 83 amar PY: Tae S wen adtepcresiesteatereta Hemel cv Just as the cloth adsorbs the color from the water,boiled with Kusumbha etc, colouring materials, similarly, the enema, absorbs the Doshas from the moistened body. 84 Basti Chikitsa Sresthata- importance of enema therapy :- Mata: HoT Wear AAedaa aaa SsTSIVT a aed ae a g HRaeeatl aah: we oeaHfer Sa faceesaticafancrdaen faattrdennt: W AEA TEMTAGET UAT Tegaediden ATTA eT ST aeatatrcare sft wesc: pecan fafa aft a ateatch: For all the diseases which are localized in the Shakha (extremities), Koshta (alimentary tract), Marma (vital organs), all the organs above the shoulders, there is no other cause, more important than Vata. Vata is the one responsible for transportation and destruction of the increased faeces, Kapha, Pitta and other Malas — wastes; Page No. 250 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan To balance the greatly increased Vata, there is no treatment more efficient other than enema therapy. Hence it is described as half of the treatment (Ardha Chikitsa) — of all diseases while some others authorities say, that it is full treatment even. wer Poptedaanraierdsecds Were He Similarly, Sira Vyadha — venesection treatment is considered to be effective in vitiated blood conditions. 87 Siravyadha is the treatment either half or full for the vitiated / increased blood which is the cause for internal and external diseases. Thus ends the chapter Basti Vidhi- the 19th in Sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 251 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 20 Nasya Vidhi aa fafer - Nasal Medication This chapter explains in detail about types, methods, indications and contra indication of nasal instillation of medicine — Nasya therapy. It is the 20" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. segarfaany faleteneatrcad arm fe Rat aax da aqearee efecdt alt Nasya- Nasal medication is especially described for the treatment of diseases of the parts above the shoulders; Nose is the gateway for the head, spreading through this, the nasal medication reaches all the parts of the head and neck and cures the diseases. 1 Trividha Nasya — three kinds of Nasal medication:- Nasya treatment is of three kinds — 1. Virechana Nasya — purgatory 2. Brimhana Nasya — nourishing and 3. Shamana — Palliative, Virechana Nasya — fataet RA: eplasaeaea Tey aitnsspiAaierprornrrancral It does purification. It expels the Doshas of head and neck out of the body. It is useful in Shirashoola — headache, Jadya — loss of movement of the head, heaviness, stiffness Syanda — eye diseases Galamaya — diseases of the throat, Shopha — swelling, Ganda — enlargement of glands, Krumi— worm infestation Granthi — tumour, fibroid Kushta — skin diseases Apasmara — Epilepsy and Peenasa — rhinitis Page No. 252 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shodhana nasya tard alr: eet a ware: HomeaMieeaTey AYIA Shodhana nasya is by the use of fats — (oils and ghee), suitable to the diseases and processed with appropriate drugs, in the form of Paste, decoction etc. and mixed with honey, salt and Asava (fermented infusion). 5 Brimhana Nasya — GE Aerator Fatah Faxare ARAM TAS Healey Haags Nourishing type of Nasya treatment is required for Vataja Shula — headache of Vata origin, Suryavarta — Headache that increases by the day Svarakshaya — loss of voice, Nasa, Asya Shosha — emaciated — dryness of the nose and mouth, Vak Sangha — Difficulty to speak Krichra bodha — difficulty in opening of eyes and Apabahuka- difficulty of movement of the Arm. 3 Brimhana Nasya FEU TegHTAT AFIT Brimhana Nasya is by the use of juice of meat or blood of animals of desert- like lands, mixed with Khapura —plant extracts, resin, Gums etc. Shamana Nasya — Waar aAferpreargsaThAcyMTANTAT Palliative nasal medication is required in Neelika — blue patches on the skin, Vyanga — discolored patch on face diseases of the hair and of the eyes. 4 waet arorieyd: after afeterat a Shamana Nasya is by the use of juice of meat, blood milk or even water. 6 Page No. 253 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Anya Nasya Prakarah — other kinds of nasal medication :- Aged ofangiea afaer tte 39 ATA Hones: satised a cect: aeifatact: & Marsha and Pratimarsha are the two subdivisions of sneha nasya- nasal medication with fat material based on the quantity —of fats used. Avapeeda is from paste (Kalka), fresh juice, decoction and it is a strong purgation to the head. 7 tart fatacequt assured Aware Dhmana is in the form of powder- to be blown into the nose and is a purgative. VSS asa ATTA a fe atat ae qicaeresia It is administered by blowing it inside with the help of air from the mouth, the power held in a tube of six Angula in length, having opening at both its end. It pulls out the greatly imbalanced Doshas because it is in the form of powder. 8 Nasya Matra — quantity of nasal drops:- we Reasaeiraqaaeasera ea marae egeenset se wer aeeaicgrentaien ATE Ua UT HAT The amount of liquid that drops after immersing two digits of the index finger in any liquid and taking the finger out forms one bindu- | drop. 10, 8 and 6 such drops are the maximum, moderate and minimum doses, respectively of Marsha Nasya (oil / fat medication). In respect of Paste (Kalka), fresh juice, decoction the doses are less by two bindu. i.e. maximum, medium and minimum does of Avapidaka kind of nasya are 8,4 and 6 drops respectively. 9-10 Nasya Anarhah — persons unsuitable to nasal medication :- Ueet J arate AACR SHA Tiere ayerctarraiay: MATA THAT ART STA HAART TITTARL eteP RATATAT ATTA erat accaedtat sar sendag leet eaeaeeprecawey: Page No. 254 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Nasal medication should not be administered to persons who have just then consumed water, wine, artificial poison (Garavisha — chronic poisoning) and fat (as part of Snehana therapy or who wish to consume them, soon, who have taken food just then, who have already taken bath or who desire to take bath-soon, who have had blood letting therapy- or severe bleeding due to other causes, who are having acute rhinitis, Who are getting natural urges of the body; the woman who has recently delivered, patients of dyspnoea, COPD, Asthma and cough, those who have undergone purification (Panchakarma) therapies (Vamana and Virechana) who have been given Basti treatment — just then, at unsuitable seasons and on Sunless cloudy days except in emergency during diseases. 11-12 2 aT ast Vasa Old: VASAT, Heated Aca, arifereneact Seeger I Yalet Mcareraaeaa: wy ga wea fer area aes aug aay arene RA earareasaesa ¢s ASAE FaTHY GT Wet: eat ear Nasal medication should be administered in morning for Shleshma — increase of Kapha, during midday for pitta, in the evening or night for the healthy. During Sharath (Autumn) and Vasantha (Spring), it should be given in forenoon. During winter, it should be given in midday. Evenings in Grisma —summer, when there is sunlight during Varsha- rainy season. It should be done both in evening and morning daily in the following diseases. Vataja shiroroga — diseases of the head caused by Vata, Hikka — Hiccup, Ayama — tetanus, Apatanaka - Convulsive disorders, Manyasthambha — stiffness of the neck, and Svarakshaya — hoarseness of voice, 13-15 Valen HIT Aas T dart In other diseases, it should be done on every alternative days for a week. 16 Page No. 255 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Nasya Vidhi-— procedure of medication :- va eaatcaasrer TePAaIHeT T frarceraaeaes sed Taal Ta: seicarersteees wnPeraTS TAT ferret faa it ara arearge Trenta qardor ferret aed WedaeHrteranuie AGA qetefeace fersdracaredatesrarecta: sretysetaed afaferat TTA The head of the person who has attended to this essential activities — elimination of urine and faeces, washing of the teeth and mouth etc. earlier, should be massaged with oil and given fomentation (mild sweating). He should then be made to lie — on a cot in a room devoid of breeze, the parts above his shoulders should be given fomentation (mild sweating) once again, He is made to lie straight with his face upwards, extending his arms and legs, the medicine slightly warmed with the help of hot water, should be taken either in a tube or soaked in a piece of cloth, and instilled into each nostril alternately, keeping the other one closed. After instilling, his soles, neck, palms, ears etc. should be massaged- mildly, he should then turn to his sides and spit out till the entire medicine comes out. In this manner two or three nasal medications should be administered to him. Fear ead RedcaRert Re: Ife goes unconscious, cold water should be sprinkled over the face, avoiding head. 21 Sneha Nasya- Nasal medication with fat materials:- AG fetaAeMecd EearersTeT ITA Nasal medication with fat material should be given at the end of purgative Nasal medications, in consideration of the Doshas etc. Aled Teed Tassgcct: acd: gat dicar Halong hao] aveyea After medication is completed, the patient should lie with face upwards, for a period of uttering one hundred syllables (for 100 seconds), Then he should inhale smoke of medicated herbs and gargle the month with lukewarm water many times to cleanse the throat. 21-22 '4 Page No. 256 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Symptoms of good Sneha nasya (with oil or ghee) — TRARY Galea Pacers earareay 23 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan (remember that Marsha and Pratimarsha are the two types of Sneha nasya) Sukha Uchvasa — Expiration without difficulty, Sukha swapna — sleep Sukha bodha — easy awakening from sleep and Akshapatava — keenness of sense organs are the signs of lubricating nasal therapy properly done. 23 Symptoms of inadequate Sneha nasya (with oil or ghee) — wet aferecetrar eet ares Fee Akshi stabdhata — Loss of movement of the eyes, Shosha Nasa asye — emaciation, dryness of the nose and mouth Murdha shunyata — feeling of emptiness inside the head are the signs of dryness- or inadequate Lubrication. Symptoms of excess Sneha nasya - Rear sit Hoga PIT: Kandu — Itching Guruta — feeling of heaviness of the head, Praseka — excess salivation, Aruchi — anorexia Peenasa — rhinitis are signs of excess of Lubrications therapy. 24 Symptoms of Good Virechana (Purgation) Nasya therapy - gaRerar seer aarara aye: GaReact vetea:, area sfatarract akshikaghuta — lightness of the eyes, vaktra swara vishuddhi — clean mouth and clear voice; Inadequate Virechana Nasya (purgative therapy ) causes exacerbation of the diseases and excess therapy leads to emaciation. 25 Page No. 257 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pratimarsha Nasya:- Wie: aTcenerareag ad arcay watsal srearoray aft at feast qvetiaret Feat sraeraity para frcepe ter sferasclicraseary a, detaracdar fe a: Pratimarsha Nasya is a type of oil / fat Nasya. Here the dose is very low. Hence, it is indicated in wide variety of diseases. It can be administered to Kshata — wounded, Kshaama — the emaciated, Baala — the children, Vruddha — the aged and Sukhaatma — those who lead a happy conservative life; it can be administered even during unsuitable time, season, day etc. It can also be administered during rainy season. Contra indication for Pratimarsha nasya — It is not suitable in Dushta Peenasa — infective Rhinitis, Madyapeeta — those who has have drunk wine, Abalashrota — People with low ears- low hearing capacity Krumidushita Murdha — head infested with worms, utklishta Dosha — in whom, in the Doshas are greatly imbalanced and moving from place to place; In these conditions, it is not suitable because it is of less quantity. 26-27 Pratimarsha Kala — time to administered Pratimarsha Nasya — feeresfacdiecie: TAATCA TATRA RAY HAST WVSY GAS HST SUA [Rll GeAHCTA FRAT Asal Hed 3ret afataegn: | After head massage After Gandusha (gargling) After Anjana — collyrium, After defecation, After tooth brushing, After bouts of laughing ; its dose is two Bindu- 2 drops. 28 USaE BAe Ue: , FTAMMETY ATL eat UST, del aedales ATG: Page No. 258 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pratimarsha cleanses, clears the channels, relieves fatigue, improves eye sight, bestows sturdiness to the teeth and mitigates the Vata.29 Kriya Nisiddha Vayas — unsuitable age for therapies — a aeaaercaee, atrtreaneitieracay at denscral (a: ade aAletsTa FT UfewAeIa af Ufecdshletacdatt Nasya should not be administered to those who are less seven years and more than 80 years of age; Dhuma- inhalation of smoke of drugs should not be administered for children below 18 years; Kavala- mouth gargling should not be administered for children below five years; Shodhana — purification (Panchakarma) therapies like Vamana, Virechana etc. should not be administered below 10 years and above 70 years of age. 30-31 HATHA Met: Ie eet Aetaer Fone Hace fe fercaatacney a Oa sean aft conga avlagay Pratimarsha — kind of nasal medication is good from birth to death just like basti treatment. It provides the benefits like Marsha Nasya (oil, high dose if used daily, it does not need any control — regarding food and activities nor it has any risks like Marsha Nasya. 32 data o aearet frase ead 113311 RR: VaSAMTACaA Fel: FAEAET Aa | Medicated oil only is ideal for daily use of Nasya (Pratimarsha), because the head is the dwelling place of kapha and no fat other than oil, can keep it healthy. 33 separated qoicastrpsea ag a ofeadt oa fae a sdqanie al AY qaten ae UT Aeteda: seaman perarcaraaearcit seanTAracdt T aaaea Patera Immediate and delayed action, more and less benefits are the results of Marsha and Pratimarsa respectively. If there is no difference between then, who will resort to marsha which is associated with controls — regarding food and activities and risks? In the same way, Acchapana — drinking of pure fat alone and Vicharana- intake of fat mixed with foods etc. Similar is the case of Kuti Pravesika — one kind of rejuvenation therapy where the person needs to stay in a house for Page No. 259 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan weeks together, taking Chyawanprash etc. and Vatatapika- Rejuvenation treatment, wherein patient can do his routine work. Similar is the case of Anuvasana — fat enema and Matra basti— fat enema with very little oil 34-36 Anu taila - re Ss 1S aTdicagry Hcoaay PAUSE ATA TAA fHivcteh HAMM Meg Teed Hea Fad so donee eerept aReea det cof vee Bieter atta ANTE ore fatedarA AAAI ALT ASTAIecMaAdd 3¢ edie) 2 t Jivanti, Jala, Devadaru, Jalada, Twak, Sevya, Gopi (sariva), Hima, Darvi twak, Madhuka, Plava, Agaru, Shatavari, Pundrahva, Bilva, Utpala, the two Dhavani, surabhi, the two Sthira, Krmihara (Vidanga), Patram (Cinnamon leaf), Truti (Cardamom), Renuka, Kinjalka, Kamala (lotus) and Bala- are to be boiled in one hundred parts of rain water / pure water and decoction reduced to one tenth part; to this decoction, equal quantity of sesame oil is added and cooked for ten times. (the decoction is added to the oil, boiled till water evaporation. Again, equal quantity of decoction is added, evaporated. This process is repeated for 10 times. During the tenth cooking, equal quantity of goats milk (equal to the quantity of oil) is added — and cooking is completed. This oil known as Anutaila, used as nasal drops, bestows great benefits. 37-38 Nasya Phala- Benefits of Nasya treatment — Uolleo Arai cde heey ala ea aT a: etiecaredaea srasereaeli erat: The skin, shoulders, neck face and chest become thick, well developed and bright; The body parts and the sense organs become strong disappearance of grey hairs will be obtained by persons who becomes habituated to nasal medication. 39 Thus ends the chapter Nasya Vidhi- the twentieth in suthrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 260 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 21 Dhumpana {autre - Medicated Smoking In this chapter, we are learning in detail about herbal smoking, its benefits, indications, timing, contra indication etc. This is the 21“ chapter of Ashtangahrudayam Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. SES aac Fae TSAI T Tele WacyA AalsicAaley & The person who wishes to take care of his health should inhale herbal smoke daily to treat or to prevent the onset of diseases of the parts above the shoulders, arising from — increases of kapha and Vata. | Types of Dhumapana — ferey Ata: a ders ad adam ay alsa: Feaser are AeA aa chatores: ats Snigdha Dhuma — lubricating, also known as Mrudu (Soft) / Prayogika — useful in Vata imbalance. Madhya Dhuma — medium — useful in Vata and Kapha imbalance. Also known as Shamana Dhuma Teekshna Dhuma — strong, useful in Kapha imbalance. Also known as Virechana dhuma (Purifying). 2 Dhuma Anarhabh- person unsuitable for inhalation - a wattcatct fakacterAey fafeRieatietortarenieviaccdaeary, Fear tag cafe sa ere aT Peas TUS seer feria Inhalation of smoke should not be done for persons who are suffering from Raktapitta- bleeding disease, Virikta — who has undergone Virechana therapy, Page No. 261 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Udara — ascites, intestinal obstruction Meha — diabetes, urinary tract disorders Timira — blindness, Urdhwa Anila— upward movement of Vata, Adhmana — Flatulence, bloating Rohini- a serious disease of the throat, diphtheria, Datta Basti — who have been administered enema, who have just eaten fish, wine, curds, milk, honey, fats and poison; who are injured in the head, Pandu- anemia and Jagarita — those who have kept awake at night. 2a — 3a Side effects of herbal smoking - Taticaets TAS Fe Hel Ae Alepel ivi GAT Here aiferat a aa efter Taferiea: Doing Dhumapana at improper time or in excess leads to Rakta pitta- bleeding disease, Andhya — blindness, Badhirya — deafness, Trut — excessive thirst Murcha — fainting, loss of consciousness Mada, Moha — delusion For this cold regimen should be adopted. 5 Treatment aa efit fafeféa: cold regimen is the ideal treatment Dhumapana Kala- proper time for inhalation - Indication for Mridu Dhuma — Octo TesrA Ta CAAA EAHA TA SRR Ged Hors YHAed MaeyGA Mild, lubricating smoke should be inhaled Kshut — at the end of sneezing, Jrumbhita — yawing, Vit — defecation, Mutra — urination Striseva — copulation, shastrakarma — surgical operation, Page No. 262 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Hasya — bouts of laughing Dantakashta — use of tooth brush. Indication for Madhyama Dhuma — Hay ferMekded T ACTA Medium strength smoke should be inhaled at the end of the night, end of the meals and end of Nasya therapy, Virechana Dhuma — Pgiearaleteaeoeded Lay purgative, strong smoke should be inhaled Nidra — at the end of sleep, Nasya — at the end of Nasya treatment Anjana — After applying collyrium Snana — After bath and Chardi— After vomiting. 5-6 Dhuma yantra- smoking apparatus - aeacrmenged Pat aad eT FAA TSAMAM CATA HATHA, Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The smoke apparatus should be prepared from the same material as of enema nozzle (from metals like gold, silver, iron etc); It should have three chambers It should be straight It should permit the entry of the thumb and a Kolasthi- seed of jujube fruit through orifices at this root and tip respectively. 7 The length of the tube should be 24 Angula (width of one knuckle) for Mrudu (soft, Sneha) Dhuma 32 Angula for medium Dhuma and 40 Angula for strong Virechana Dhuma. 8 Page No. 263 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pramanam WAM qecrereraeay AT dak wT 7 HTM HAT: VAT asechiiet Te qtevt - 3x 8 Taree - 4x8 ART - 5x8 Dhumapana Vidhi-— made of inhalation - oaTase faqareater rey ere Feogathah yt afta ard The patient should sit straight, attentive, with his mouth open and inhale the smoke through each nostril alternatively, While inhaling from one nostril, he should close the other. Inhalation should be done thrice — inhaling the smoke and letting it out together form one bout; three such bouts should be done each time. 9 Dhuma acording to movement of dosha we arareaaterase ah Morea Smoke should be inhaled through the nose first if the imbalanced Doshas are localized in the nose and head. TcFAMATY TIT, If Dosha from nose and head are not coming out, but are adhering, inhalation should be done first through the mouth to make them move; and later through the nose. faut a avodt 2 when the Doshas are localized in the throat — inhalation should be done in reverse order- first by the nose and later by the mouth. The smoke inhaled (either from mouth or from nose) should be let out only through the mouth; BIS DURCICCUISL cal if let out through the nose, Page No. 264 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan it produces loss of vision -10-11 Time sretaatal: orcteat eared PaTafeaterreaer: Smoking should be done thrice, with three times inhaling and three exhaling alternately. sea: Pacer Rae, cate , eter ay Rreaget Snigdha- lubricating, mild kind of smoke should be taken for only set of three inhalation and exhalations, during day time. Madhya- medium kind — two sets of 3 inhales and exhales and Shodhana- purgative, strong kind, 3 — 4 sets of 3 inhales and exhales. Herbal smoking blends — Dhuma dravyani — For Mridu- mild kind of smoke, GOMVAST SIT T Wel oF cea TT TG Fecealvraeteraetoraleiarerna qasele dry Hie ears aca AHA Saved Waa aah Aga Coa Ura HHA AIST Aa: Hrqveatiece: TAS: Hola ARO Ael Asa FH FAL useful drugs are-Aguru, Guggulu, Musta, sthauneya, Shaileya, Nalada, Usheera, Valaka, Varanga, Kounti, Madhuka, Bilvamajja, elavaluka, Shrivestaka, Sarjarasa, Dayamaka, Madana, Plava, Shallaki, Kumkuma, Masha, Yava, Kunduruka, Tila, oil obtained from fruits and pith of trees, fat, Marrow, muscle- fat and ghee. 13-15 For Shamana- Madyama, medium kind of smoke UAT Meokchl AMAT Yee HAA, UMM GFR RAMANA: AAT: uBeay qavicay sah vacate Tea HP SaINT: Page No. 265 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan useful drugs are - shallaki, Laksha,Prithvika, Kamala, Utpala, Barks of Nyagrodha, Udumbara, Asvattha, Plaksa and Rodhra; Sita, Yasthimadhu (licorice), Suvarnatwak, Padmaka, Raktayastika Kustha, tagara and other scents — perfumeries. For Teekshna — strong, Purgative kind of smoke — ctect satfasarat fererr Se AAA aa ac Hera TeURCMT Hevniet sot Hed Tatar: useful drugs are Jyotismati, Nisha (turmeric), Dashamula, Ala, Laksa, Shweta, Triphala, Substances which have strong smell and drugs of Murdha Virechana Gana- vide chapter 15, -13- 18 Dhumavarti- preparation of smoke wick- CBG NEC COMCCICCUECICI EES Pavedusiteeaay warped: Tea aReponeyet sacar ser ay ore eat fast at eterssea Bers qatar wqattacaset satertt Areed (tall, grass like plant), twelve Angula in length, soaked in water for a day and night, should be wrapped in five layers-one over the other with a ribbon of cloth; it is smeared with thin paste of drugs, its thickness being that of the middle portion of the thumb. It should be dried in shade, removed of its reed, smeared with any suitable fat material (oil / ghee) It should be inserted into the smoking tube, lit with fire and the smoke is inhaled. 19-20 Kasaghna Dhuma- Antitussive smoke for cough — MIaAeress AST AT SMSTet Weise a TAT Hae HATTA A tube either 10 or 8 Angula in length should be fixed to a hole made in a capsule of earthen saucers and the person suffering from cough made to inhale smoke — through the tube. 21 Notes- A burning coal / charcoal is placed inside an earthen pot. Powder of herbs is sprinkled over it and covered with another vessel, having a hole at its center. A tube is connected to the hole, through which the smoke is inhaled. Page No. 266 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Dhumapana Phala- benefits of smoke therapy- are: gare: thereat faratcd yfeeiee: oegar aerate: aeReaahecaconss ceat ear Gat at Eger 2 Cough, Dyspnoea, Rhinitis, Disorders of voice, bad smell — of the nose and mouth, pallor of the face, disorders of hairs; discharges, itching, pain and in activities — diminution or loss of function of the ears, mouth and eyes; stupor and hiccup do not affect the person who inhales smoke- habitually. 22 Thus ends chapter — Dhumapana Vidhi- the twenty first of sutrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 267 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 22 Gandushadi Vidhi a»gufe fafer- Gargles and other therapies Let us learn about few oral, ear and head therapy, their benefits, procedure etc. It is the 22" Chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter is called as Gandushadi Vidhi Adhyaya, because it starts with explanation of Gandusha — mouth gargling. Types of Full volume mouth gargling — Gandusha Prakara — Note: Gandusha is treatment procedure wherein the patient holds the liquid medicine in his mouth, to its full, for specific time period. UGIN ogy: fears: eeereeett Tred FAEAA AY Arsaeaeniey ¢ Beco qoreat: Gandusha is of four kinds, viz — Snigdha — lubricating, with oils and fats — for Vata imbalance disorder Shamana — palliative — for Pitta imbalance disorder Shodhana — purifying — for Kapha imbalance disorder Ropana — healing. 2. Snigdha Gandusha — eae: lubricating full mouth gargle is by the use of oil processed with herbs of sweet, sour and salt tastes. Shamana Gandusha — PAT: eT palliative full mouth gargle is by herbs of bitter, astringent and sweet tastes. Page No. 268 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shodhana — alert: fart HE HAT Tesct: purifying full gargle is with herbs of bitter, pungent, sour, salt tastes and possessing Ushna — hot property. Ropana — Get: aur fara: healing full gargle is with herbs of astringent and bitter. 3. Gandusha Drava — liquids used — aa tig: aft aye act weg Ta aa oeaed oT aera aoddad fared a yereat wats ¥ Fats — oil, ghee etc., milk, Honey with water Shukta — fermented gruel, Madya — wine, Mamsarasa — juice of meat, Mutra — urine of animals or Dhanyamla — wash of grains fermented by keeping overnight, These liquids are commonly used in Gandusha. The liquids may be mixed with a kalka (herbal paste) The liquids may be cooked or raw The liquids should be comfortable to touch and to hold in the mouth. Tilakalkodaka — Sesame seed paste with water — In conditions like Dantaharsha — tingling of the teeth, Dantachala — shaky teeth, and disease of the mouth caused by Vata, Gandusha with water mixed with sesame seed paste — either lukewarm or cold, is useful. 5 Taila (sesame oil), Mamsarasa (meat soup), Ghrita (ghee) Ksheera (cow milk) For daily use, either sesame oil or meat soup is good. Page No. 269 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan PMETeleaI We act Walesa fas amiftaqeedt a afiert vatsrerar When there is local or general burning sensation (Daha), ulceration and wounds caused by foreign bodies, poison wounds, alkalies (Kshara) and burns by fire, it is best to hold either ghee or milk. 3-6. Area eas sey Heals AA Tey STOO Act AY Wg UROT Honey - Holding honey in the mouth removes the sliminess of the mouth, heals the ulcers quickly, relieves burning sensation and thirst. 7. SAT FASTETAET Here hee ee, Holding Dhanyamla — fermented grain wash in the mouth removes distaste, dirt (of teeth and tongue) and bad smell from the mouth. aearerar eft FEIT Wa The same — Dhanyamla without salt, used cold, is best to remove dryness of the mouth. FR ANTFT AVM fet MeacAVIeIT AA, Holding Ksharambu — water containing alkalies in the mouth quickly breaks up the accumulation of Kapha. qaroiqaavgtatad arora Holding comfortable warm water brings about ightness and cleansing of the mouth. 8 — 9. Gandusha Vidhi — procedure - fear OTT fede ATA ThetlHeeU: vo sega fata setes fara TogVAaeaeat re 4 The person should sit in a place devoid of breeze (Nivata) but in sunlight (Sa Aatapa). His shoulders and neck should be massaged and fomented; Keeping his face slightly lifted up, ONT Ad cAA CAT aT AT STAT Page No. 270 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan he should hold the liquid in his mouth till the mouth gets filled with Kapha or till the nose and eyes start secreting liquid. 10-11. Difference betweek Kavala and Gandusha — separ Ae Teh wegU:, acl ses Filling the mouth with liquids fully not permitting any movement inside is Gandusha. Taking liquid into mouth and moving it around by gargling for specific time period is Kavala. Kavala — mouth gargles — ASME: HeEpaTaRTT: Wa HVSTAATTAATT: &2 groracearerel Perea Hear FAM MeHagascy Diseases of the neck, head, ears, mouth and eyes, Praseka — excess salivation, diseases of the throat, dryness of the mouth, nausea, Tandra — stupor, Aruchi — anorexia and Peenasa — rhinitis are curable by Kavala — mouth gargles. 12. Pratisarana — coating the mouth with herbs - aront Taisrar Por: Pafeer waOTL oad Ta Ry sogy fascia: ¢3 Pratisarana — applying herbs to the interior of the mouth with the finger — is of three kinds, viz. Kalka — in the form of paste Rasakriya — solidified decoction and Curna — powder It should be done in diseases of Kapha origin with the same herbs as suggested for Gandusha. 13. Mukhalepa — application of paste of herbs over the face, Facial creams ques: Fer atefaver aviged a: ey Mukhalepa — application of paste of herbs over the face is of three types — Doshaha — removing the Doshas, Vishaha — removing poison and Varnakara — improving complexion. 14. Seo area eret:, WY steaeefteret: Page No. 271 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan It should be applied warm for Vata and Kapha and For Pitta imbalance, it should be cold Its three thickness — Frat: aqeter Persrersaeteonte: Minimum — 1/4" Angula (Finger breadth) Medium — 1/3 Angula Maximum — % Angula thickness 15. HeysHeT Raney, Useat qaicreatray a angfacar sree deed HUST BTA It should be allowed to remain till it becomes dry; when dry, it vitiates the skin colour, hence it should be removed soon after it becomes dry. While removing, it should be moistened for easy removal. After removal, a gentle oil massage should be given. 16. Things not to do — faasaicearea TATA ATAT a Pa: The person should avoid day sleep, speaking for long hours, exposure to fire and sunlight, sorrow and anger during the procedure. Contra indication - It should not be administered to persons suffering from a aioe: Gert sreitfacceret clos antree orate Peenasa — rhinitis, Ajeerna — indigestion, Nasya — who have received Nasya therapy, Hanugraha — locked jaw, Aruchi — anorexia Jagarana — loss of sleep. Benefits — a tea aaa: arene casT afar afters: If properly done, it cures Akalapalita — premature graying of hair, Vyanga — discolored patch on face Page No. 272 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Vali — wrinkles, Timira — blindness and Neelika — bluish vision (a type of blindness) 17 — 18. The following six recipes are ideal for the six seasons commencing with Hemanta —(early winger) respectively. 1. For Hemanta (early winter) — #leHSST qeaei gmat aittasar: Marrow of Kola, root of Vrisha (Vasa — Adhatoda vasica) , Sabara and Gaurasarsapa (White mustard). 2. For Shishira (winter) — Aelefet feet: PIM atdicag IEAM AAT: Root of Simhi, Krisna tila (black sesame), bark of Darvi and Dehusked Yava (barley). 3. For Vasantha (Spring) — aaeofeareMR RNase: Root of Darbha, Hima; Usheera, Shirisha, Mishi and Tandula (rice grains) 4. For Greeshma (summer) — PHA oH cS NGA Hae a Kumuda, Utpala, Kalhara, Durva, Madhuka and Chandana (Sandalwood). 5. Varsha (Rainy season) — HAH AAA ATTA Kaliyaka, Tila, Usira, Mamsi, Tagara and Padmaka. 6. Sharath (Autumn) — AAA ATU STE TASH AM AAAS Talisa, Gundra, Pundrahva, Yasti, Kasa, Nata and Aguru. 19 - 21. seratetear cor sAeaMey Ye Ta: Fareraeltorant carl sate aelerey aaa UTR VAT ATA TAA For those who are habituated to application of paste of herbs on the face, the vision becomes keen, the face never dull, but smooth and brilliant resembling a lotus flower. 22. Murdha Taila — Oil treatment of the head — seus a raat afeavdia adiaerey 23 Heer see aaaea SecA Murdha Taila — application of oil to the head is of 4 types. Shiro Abhyanga — smearing oil and mild massage, Shiro Pariseka— pouring oil in continuous stream, Shiro Pichu — keeping cloth soaked in oil over the entire area of scalp Shiro Basti — making the oil stand on the head with the help of a compound. Each successive one being more effective. Means, Shirobasti is the most effective among the four. Shiro Abhyanga — aT: Walerceat ther Hog Aeey, applying oil and doing mild massage should be used in cases of dryness, itching and dirtyness. Page No. 273 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pariseka — s Ruta agaHary J one: pouring oil in a thin stream is useful in ulcerations of the scalp, headache, burning sensation, wounds, and suppurations in the scalp. It is also known as Shirodhara. Shiro Pichu — fry: Hered ped Yet oil soaked cloth / cotton swabs, applied over the scalp — useful in case of falling of hairs, cracking of the skin and feeling of burning sensation. Shirobasti— AEN oT seated wafer sfecoray areareaeny fara RAAT aT arecy making the oil to stand on the head in cases of Netrasthamba — lack of movement of eyeball Prasupti— loss of sensation of the scalp, Ardita — facial palsy, Jagara — loss of sleep, Nasa Asya Shosha — dryness of the nose and mouth, Timira — blindness and Daruna Shiroroga — dreadful diseases of the head. 23 — 26. Shirobasti Vidhi - fatteaes ferroureats arepea yet Perera Meet TAT wMavisetaeaa Tae aErased Jaana set ATHeda ATA ae Tareas HIST fer Beg Heaal Maas Maa aay saraenaay Ferereesel ye wees, Page No. 274 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan ATSOASS ca FHeenie AeA AFA RA Aas AT Aa The person who has been purified — with Vamana, Virechana etc., should be gently massaged with oil and given mild fomentation. Then at the closing of the day (evening) he should be made to sit on a stool of the height of the knee, a strap of leather made from the leather of either cow or buffalo, twelve Angula in width (8 —9 inches) and equal to that of the head in circumference should be wrapped around the head, just above the ears, covered by a piece of cloth over the forehead, and fastened tight with a thread. The joints and intervening spaces should be packed with paste of black gram flour in order to prevent leakage of oil. Then, medicated oil prescribed for the disease, should be poured over the head, in luke warm condition, to a height of one Angula over the skin of the scalp. Maatrakala/ time for holding the medicine Marra Felareensel Ye Tentey ARReMeasst cde It should be held till secretion of fluid appears in the mouth and nose, or for a period of 10,000 Matra Kala for Vata 8,000 Matra Kala for Pitta and 6,000 Matra Kala for Kapha 1 Matra Kala = time required to blink the eye once. For a healthy person, it is 1,000 Matra Kala. Anantara kriya roomie AEA AFA RA Aas AT Aa After this period, the shoulders etc. should be massaged, after removing the oil over the head. Seven days shall be the maximum period for this therapy. 27-31. Karna Purana - filling the ears with oil — anaept wef avlape aay Bat: CAeAled BWacAAeMaAa|ay 32 The ears should be filled with medicated fat/oil, root of the ears massaged, till the pain or the disease subsides and for a period of one thousand Matra Kala in case of healthy persons. 32. Page No. 275 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Matra Kala — maT SEAT ATCT STETAVS HAL AMA TA ABT I a Bar The time required for the finger of the right hand to move around the right knee once or the time required for closing and opening of the eyelids once is defined as a Matrakala. 33. Murdhataila Phala — benefits of oiling of the head — Heed aad oNed wpe Ree: TART safe setae sare Tees oT Heo Oiling of the head prevents/cures falling, graying and matting of the hair, cracking of skin of the scalp, diseases of the head of Vata imbalance, produces clarity of sense organs, imparts strength to the voice, jaw and head. 34. nd Thus ends the chapter Gandushadi Vidhi — the 22" in Sutrasthana of Astanga Hridaya Page No. 276 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 23 Aschotana Anjana Vidhi 31gadet 31>sfeT fafér - Eye drops, Eye salve Therapy Let us explore Ayurveda eye treatment methods and types. This is the 23"\chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter is called as Aschotana Anjana Vidhi Adhyaya. Aschotana and Anjana refer to eye therapies. Aschotana = application of liquid drug in the form of drops in the eyes. Aschotana — Herbal eye drops In all diseases of the eyes, Aschotana (eye drops) is very beneficial. It helps to prevent Ruk — eye pain Toda — pricking pain Kandu — eye itching Gharsha — feeling of friction in the eyes Ashru — excessive lacrimation, tears Daha — burning sensation Raga — eye redness. 1. Drops of medicated liquids should be warm in case of Vata imbalance. Lukewarm in Kapha imbalance and cold in Rakta (blood) and Pitta imbalance. Aschotana Vidhi— procedure :- The person should lie on a cot in a place devoid of breeze. His eyes should be opened with the left hand of the physician The medicine dispenser, either a seashell or a wick is held in the right hand of the physician just two Angulas (finger width) above the inner angle of the eye (inner canthus) 10 — 12 drops of the medicated liquid are put into the eye. Afterwards the eyes should be cleaned with soft cloth. Mild fomentation is given with a piece of cloth rinsed in warm water in disorders of Kapha and Vata. In disorders due to blood and Pitta vitiation, eyes are mopped with a cloth dipped in cold water. 2 -4 Very hot and strong medicinal drops lead to pain, redness and loss of vision; Very cold drops produce pricking pain, loss of movement of eye balls and discomfort; Excess therapy produces roughness of the lids, friction and difficulty in opening of the lids; Inadequate (less) therapy leads to worsening of the diseases, increase of swelling, redness and absence of lacrimation. 5 — 6. The medicine dropped into the eye, entering into the channels of the joints (fornices of the eyes), head, nose and face, eliminates the imbalanced Doshas which have localized in the upper parts of the body. 7. Page No. 277 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Anjana Vidhi — procedure of applying collyrium (eye salve) to the eye :- Usa SCRGIG ERIE DI ae vaafes sroueite sifaaug tfeacreiard ¢ aid Trectrn 3rafeet: Aredat faetya: & Application of collyrium is suitable for the person who has his body purified by Vamana, Virechana etc, in whom the Doshas are localized in the eyes only, when signs of fully ripened state such as slight oedema (Alpa shopha), severe itching (Ati kandu) and sliminess (Paichilya) are found, when the excretions of the eyes are thick, in persons who are being troubled by Pitta, Kapha and blood and especially in Vata imbalance. 8 — 9. Anjana is of three kinds — eee Vat eaveeadiata Fea Lekhana — scarifying, scraping Ropana — healing and Drishti prasadana — making the vision clear, soothing to the eyes; Lekhana Anjana soot oe aT HUT Heat: is prepared from herbs of astringent, sour, salt, and pungent tastes and hot potency; Ropana Anjana is prepared from herbs of bitter taste and Prasadana Anjana from herbs of sweet taste and cold potency. Page No. 278 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan deurssanteeded ase aAcwaeat asta AHA WearseraeAe aa, To combat the side effects of strong collyrium, Prasadana Anjana is used. This kind of usage of one Anjana against the effects of the other is called as Pratyanjana — counter collyrium. Anjana Shalaka — Collyrium apparatus - SMSO TAA Moa Asoetel Wika, A metal rod, 10 Angula in length, thin in the middle, with tips resembling a flower bud is best suited for Anjana application. eet aa For Lekhana Anjana, the Shalaka should be made of copper Wael Heeler STA W For Ropana, it should be made of iron or finger itself can be used. qaviteer BIS WT TATeay For Prasadana, Shalaka of gold and silver is used. 12 — 13. Anjana Bheda — kinds of eye salve - faust tater quifeatlarsceracret ant aed ret ate ot water water Pinda — pill — used in profound imbalance of Dosha Rasakriya — gel, confection, semisolid got from boiling decoction till solidity - used in moderate imbalance of Dosha Churna — powder are the three forms of Anjana — used in mild imbalance of Dosha. 14 evar feser chevres, afar ara Ager: The quantity of Pinda anjana prepared from strong herbs is one Harenu. The quantity of Pinda Collyrium prepared from mild herbs is two Harenu. deca Tatar The quantity of eye-salve which is in the form of gel, confection (Rasakriya) shall be that of Vella (Vidanga), giaer a a were I ctevred, fraraiaeer a Page No. 279 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan the quantity of the eye salve which is in the form of powder (Churna) is two rods full in case of strong herbs and three rods full in case of mild herbs. 15. Anjana Kala — time for:- fae cated a Ataecd Foray areurersireatay: 76 sfertrrern: eyecare eager: Wet: WE UT aeateey easyshare Heoricaal to Application of eye-salve (collyrium) should NOT be made at nights, during sleep, at midday, when the eyes are fatigued by strong rays of the sun. If done during these times, it will lead to diseases of the eyes because the Doshas get increased, spread to other sites and get liquefied. So to mitigate the Doshas, Anjana should be applied always either in the morning or in the evening when the sun is not present. 16 — 17. aerded I at feat Waloet Hever e si — - Others say, that strong Anjana should not be applied during day, because the eye which has become weak by purgation treatment from strong herbs will be further debilitated by the presence of the sun. 18. Importance of Night and Sleep for Healthy Eyes tact walt are dleacda a after eit Hera ease AT rare Yet: The eye is Agneyi — predominant with the fire element, being habituated to cold comforts it regains its strength after good sleep and nourished by the coolant nature of the night. 19. In condition of extreme increase of Kapha or in diseases which require Lekhana Anjana — scraping type, Herd soe I cafes sar ae PTA ATO Areva Tas Teekshna Anjana — strong type, can be put into the eyes even during day time, if desired, only if the day is not very hot. 20. Page No. 280 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Eyes are Aagneya RA Be Hees aa va a caevrar sara ata aeat aaes Aa: Metals are born from the ores; From ores only they — metals derive their sharpness / bluntness. Similarly, the eyes derive their power and features by Agni — Fire element. a waratt eftasia at dleonestet feat awaaaactdsd HugSasaesiye TL When there is severe cold, application of strong eye-salve is not good even at nights, because it does not cause elimination of the Doshas from the eyes. Instead, it produces itching, inactivity etc. Here Doshas get stagnated inside the eyes, even after Anjana therapy, due to cold effect. 22. Persons unfit for application of Anjana -Anjana Anarha — meateres tera aaa era aTa aT PEcINA ACARI Hevea Ae: Tare Haare: aoitinttasrchacdcd eared raat Application of Anjana should not be done to persons who are Bheeta — in fear, Vamita, Virikta — who have been administered Vamana and Virechana who are hungry, Shitavegita — who have urges of urine, faeces etc., Kruddha — anger; Jvarita — during fever, when the eyes are fatigued, Shiroruk — during headache, Shoka — bouts of grief and Jagara — loss of sleep; Adurshte Arke — when the sun is fully covered with clouds, Shira Snate — after head bath, after inhalation of smoke and drinking of wine, Ajirne — during indigestion, fatigued from excess exposure to fire and sun; Divasupte — soon after sleep during day and Pipasite — when thirsty. 23 — 24. Page No. 281 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Unsuitable Anjan Hfadeunpgrdmagececrraey | HaMeictet Aare ATTRA Anjana, which is very strong or very mild, very little or very large in quantity, very thin or very thick in consistency, very rough, coarse, very cold or very hot — should not be used. 25 sates edad: Toaaewet: siesta actet cect cardia Beer , at desyferasory fasdised UT aces ace aT TATE After applying the Anjana, the eye balls should be moved up and rotated slowly, the eyelids should also be moved slight by massaging over it; by these acts the strong eye salve spreads to all places. But opening and closing, squeezing or washing of the eyelids should not be done. 26-27. cartier aeeniaie: warrererccrer After the cessation of the activity of the drug, when the eyes have regained strength, they should be washed with water — hot or cold, suitable to the disease, Doshas and season. 28. aeongascheate Tat ae Mae sedacaier Ugeee eel aA dad The physician should lift and hold the upper lid of the left eye with a piece of cloth held in his right thumb and fingers and wash the left eye; with his left hand, the other eye. 29. Why to wash Eye after Anjana? acoA seancarst Verel Halacy HAUT Otherwise, if not washed the Anjana remaining in the lids, excites the Doshas which give rise to diseases. peqasdHeaed Aevt et a ats Ya: In case of itching and inactivity either a strong Anjana should be applied again or an inhalation of strong smoke of herbs should be done. 30. HevnssenBiacd I Pl werestet eae When the eyes are fatiqued by strong Anjana, applying a Pratyanjana — counter eye-salve which is in the form of powder and cold in effect should be done. 30%. Thus ends the chapter Aschotana — Anjana Vidhi— the 23" of Sutrasthana in Astanga Hrudaya Samhita written by Srimad Vagbhata, son of Sri Vaidyapati Simhagupta. Page No. 282 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 24 Tarpana Putpaka Vidhi aor -qeure fafer Let us learn about two main Ayurveda eye care treatments — Tarpana and Putapaka, their indication, uses etc. This is the 23 chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name is Tarpana Putapaka vidhi Adhyaya. Tarpana and Putapaka refers to two eye treatment methods. Tarpana Vidhi- procedure of Tarpana therapy:- aeet Tait Ere Beh Vet arate mated Ter afrot qasrfecraicr ¢ pepictte Reet Rica aatiet: RcHeaeadas Tas: 2 HI Me eet GAH ah Indications for Tarpana eye care procedure: When the eyes are fatigued, stiff, dry, rough or injured; in patients of increase of Vata and Pitta; when there is irregularity - Asymmetry or loss of eye Lashes, in clouded unclear vision; in patients of — diseases like Krchronmilla —difficulty in opening eyes Shiraharsha, Shirotpata — redness and hemorrhage Tama — darkness in front of eyes Arjuna,Syanda, Mantha, Anyato Vata, Vataparyaya, and Sukraka; After relief from redness lacrimation, pain, swelling and exertions. ator ava / Those Fit for Tarpana Therapy fad ado alse agar: Feary: aret AAMT Wea: AA lector aaa: agar: aeareat:. - who have purified both head by nasya and body by vamana, virecana and vasti ariel BTR. - temperate season both in We: / morning and Ua / evening Wet alecterenfat: - lying with his face upwards fetata - in room devoid of breeze Page No. 283 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Tarpana procedure - The patient should undergo purification of head — Nasya treatment and also purification of body — Vamana and Virechana. Time for Tarpana can be either morning or evening. The patient is lying with his face upwards in a room devoid of breeze. 1-3 2 Procedure aaarsHat ore arlene Se: WAL aguas orca tal Hea ward Rrearatat A wall is constructed with the paste prepared from Yava (barley) and Masha (black gram) around eye socket —resembling a well to a height of two Angula —finger breadth. attteraiond a acaresy ween Keeping the eyelids closed, medicated herbal ghee, which is liquefied by heating in hot water bed, should be poured into the well up to the level of tips of the eye lashes. Condition for Using Vasa (Muscle Fat) instead of Ghee Area ad AAC pesstaniess TAL In diseases like Naktandhya (night blindness), Vatatimira, Krichradodha etc. muscle fat should be used instead of ghee. HIATT HAAS etHeaeA Ha: The patient should then be asked to open his eyes slowly and retain the drug . Matrakala- time required to utter a soft syllable should be counted up to Amt fasortcat act afeurearat eel a mae caret ect AM ToT 7 Teer AlaT Sel T , aw AeX , aewferct fed 9c, Faeaded BT gee wT aad 100 — for the diseases of Vartma — eye lids 300 — for the diseases of Sandhi— fornices 500 — for the diseases of Sita — sclera 700 — for the diseases of Asita — cornea 800 — for the diseases of Drishti-— pupil, retina etc. 1000 — for the disease Adhimanta Page No. 284 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 1000 — for the disease caused by Vata imbalance 600 — for diseases caused by Pitta, 500 — for healthy person and for diseases of Kapha imbalance. These are the time for retaining the drug. Peas Act CaN FAS TA feral Rares YA , Aaa cal BT UT EAA After the stipulated time, the ghee should be removed through a hole done at the outer canthus The person should be given Dhumapana (herbal smoking) The person is advised not to look at the bright sky or bright objects. Tarpana days - set ofateat art , cd caaiedk, wy aed U eR cetera asa Tapana therapy should be done daily in diseases of Vata, On alternative days in diseases of Pitta, with an interval of two days for the healthy persons and in diseases of kapha, Symptoms of excess or less Tarpana — Tarpana Atiyoga, Ayoga Lakshana — Wereeiaal Fareza faere ag arate Prakasha Kshamata — Ability to withstand bright light Good eye health Vishada — clarity in vision Laghu lochana — lightness in eyes are the symptoms of good Tarpana procedure. farses Opposite of these are the symptoms of inadequate Tarpana and set aS Lat: appearance of disorders of Kapha imbalance is the symptom of Excess Tarpana. 4-11 Contraindication aor qe a aed F Bs Tarpan and Putpaka should not be administered to those who are unfit for nasya. Page No. 285 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Pathya - apathya Meese Britt afletat eras ArorAateranysse ran era a era Those who have undergone tarpana and putapaka should adhere to - healthy foods and activities for double the number of days of these therapies; during nights, he should bind the eyes with a pad of flowers like malati, mallika etc. Putapaka Vidhi- Procedure of Putapaka:- asta aka Foren efeefe Hrafr AWoardt ACA EH Teer HIOTL 2 yeah wascia yatedvda eae Just as the body becomes fatigued after Snehana therapy (drinking fats), eyes become fatigued after Tarpana therapy; In order to restore the strength to the eyes, Putapaka therapy should be done in diseases mentioned earlier. 12 Types of Putapaka — OF Ga Pet: SA Bea Aaa Ra: ee aldea afer eared Taed wees: Snehana putapaka (with fat) — for Vata imbalance disorder. Lekhana Putapaka (scraping type) — for Vata — Kapha imbalance disorder. Prasadana Putapaka (soothing) — in weakness of the eyes, vision, in disorders of Vata Pitta and Rakta and for the healthy person. 13 Putpaka Dravyas IVAW AeA AS TTT ATT: KR iN aga TET Ase:statted wewa Snehana Putapaka is done by making use of fat, marrow, muscle fat and juice of meat of animals which live in burrows (Bhushaya), which bite (Prasaha) — cut their food, cow, horse, ass etc, and those which live in Marshy lands (Anupa), or with drugs of Jivaneeya gana- (chapter 15) macerated with milk- 14 Page No. 286 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan che Ip AAAI: BC 2 aidtenegettet setcharet Aeqaiend: Lekhana Putapaka is by making use of Mastu (whey), water of yoghurt macerated with the paste of liver of animal and birds, pearls, ash of iron and copper, Saindhava- salt, Srotonjana (Antimony sulphide), Shankha (ash of conch shell), Phena- (sea foam), cuttlefish and Ala (orpiment ). 15 qT pA oy aeagc: Eaeaaterase: arate Prasadana Putapaka is by the use of cow milk / breast milk macerated with the liver, marrow, Muscle fat, Muscle of intestines and heart of animals and birds and drugs of sweet taste, and mixed with ghee. 16 Putapaka Kalpana — preparing the recipe- facaard yu es are AeHeHAr: eo seGHaceatsaga: FAY HAT asefacat Her fect Tatras: ¢¢ qacwertd: sea Ted fasiisy age The meat of animals and drugs should be made into balls of size of Bael fruit or of 1 pala (48 grams). The balls should be wrapped in leaves of Urubuka, Vata or Amboja, Smeared with fats, and given a coating of mud. After they become dry, they are placed inside the fire, of wood of Dhava or Dhavana or of dried crow dung and cooked till the balls become fire like red in appearance. After they cool off, the paste of drugs is taken out and juice extracted from it. The juice should be used for Tarpana procedure, as explained above. Maatra Kala wet ad AT aa Aaa eT 2 The juice should be retained for a period of 200 — 300 Matra Kala. 200 for Snehana and Lekhana. 300 for Prasadhana. Page No. 287 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Temperature of Drug apvoit gat, fear Brat: Juice should be Lukewarm for the Snehana and Lekhana and cold for Prasadana. At the end of the Snehana and Lekhana types, Dhumpana (medicated smoking) is indicated. 19 aeredt a qitaadt The signs and symptoms of proper, inadequate or excess of Putapaka therapy are similar to those mentioned under Tarpana therapy. 20 aor qe a aed F Bs Both Tarpana and Putapaka therapies should not be administered to those who are unfit for Nasya. Wdeaeer Broil afar erasers arecafeoarystaaran fee a frst ere The patient who has undergone Tarpana and Putapaka therapies should adhere to healthy foods and activities for double the number of days of Nasya therapy. During nights he should bind the eyes with a pad of flowers like Malati, Mallika (Jasmine varieties).21 PalcAa Aaa Uest water Aes ages: eeed aver fafael aared AAAS aa TESTA 2 All out efforts should be made to strengthen the eyes by following Nasya, Anjana, Tarpana etc, for once the vision is lost the different types of things of the world will all become one types of thing — darkness. 22 Thus ends the chapter Tapana Putapaka Vidhi- the twenty-fourth of Sutrasthana in Astangahrudaya Samhita composed by Srimad Vagbhata, son of Sri Vaidhyapati Simhagupta. Page No. 288 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 25 Yantra Vidhi aa fafer Uses of Blunt Instruments Let us learn about different types of instruments that are used in Ayurveda. This is the 25th chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name Yantra Vidhi Adhyaya. Yantra means instrument. Definition of Yantra — Yantra Nirvachana — AMMA MoM AMT Tae eL HEGHGI AE Bes eT |Riet k sat stereqnrdtent reaainserat ster ATSTIR ATA AAMT TECATHAT- 2 ufemroraysat at sreaatvericantet Equipments which are useful to extract the different types of foreign bodies causing pain in different parts of the body, to look into hemorrhoids, rectal fistula etc. to apply sharp instruments, Alkalies (Kshara) and fire (Agni Karma); to protect the remaining parts other than the diseased in therapies like enema etc, and the pot (Ghatika), ground horn (Alabu) of animal, Jambavaustha- cylindrical smooth stone etc. are all known as yantra (medical instruments). 1-2 4 FAPRIAAT Bearer fafaenewa: fans Hewegeat Yantras (instruments) are of many shapes, functions, types, hence they are to be fabricated and to be prepared with intelligence. 3 wae Ff cea Gear Hgaphaearepreanea aes qatar sean patel acta T Yantras are described in brief, as follows; Those which have their mouth resembling the mouth of Kanka (heron), Simha (lion), Ruksha (bear), Kaka (crow) and other animals and birds should be prepared under the respective names of animals and birds; Page No. 289 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 1, Swastika Yantra — Cruciform instruments — HCTMS T AAA AAT Tse: FRRIGR-Ted: HS Telfer Hots: facaea AAA Hel SHectaier T agar eeieraereaeoriasat Swsatika Yantras should be generally 18 Angula- fingers breadth —in length, They are made chiefly from iron; They are shaped like a Masura dala (cotyledon of a lentil) at its edges, held by a rivet bolt at their neck, slightly bent like an Ankusha (goad of the elephant) at its handle are known as Swastika yantra- Cruci from instruments. These are useful to pull out foreign bodies stuck hard in the bones. 4-6 2, Samdamsha yantra — forceps are of two types — ahiorne faeqercrat aeast siser aeaett cap Perey AR oer erearransott SSSA OT FAM ATTA one with a catch at its tip and the other without a catch. The one with a catch is 16 Angula length, used for extracting foreign bodies stuck up in the skin, veins, tendons and muscles.; The one without a catch is 6 Angula in length and useful for extracting small foreign bodies and eye lashes. 7-8 3, Muchundi Yantra — forceps with teeth IVS FRAGA FAH YN aaa ARTA HeroTeaeT 7 Muchundi Yantra — forceps with teeth has small teeth, straight, with tooth catch , hook at its root; useful for pulling out the fleshy parts from deep wounds and remnants of flesh from the Arma (pterygium), which has been cut. 9 4, Talayantra- instruments with flat arms Ba AMSTe AceAalead SAHA Aes TT HUTS TEATS Talayantra- instruments with flat arms are of two types- 12 Angula length, resembling the palate (fin) of the fish in shape, Page No. 290 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan - with one flat disc at its mouth; - with two flat disc; Both are useful for removing foreign bodies from the orifice of the ear. 10 5, Nadiyantra - Tubular instruments (probe) ASIA ART Varela Meret eae aA T asey afaear aoe ded alcteeaa: Nadiyantra - Tubular instruments (probe) are hollow, with one or more opening, useful for looking into body parts, recognizing foreign bodies and diseases localized in the channels of the tissues, for facilitating treatments and for sucking out. Their width, perimeter vary as per size, shape etc. of the channels. 11-12 AMSToT Helos Hea: HVSeeaaeh erehleast Nadi Yantra for seeing inside throat shall be 10 Angula in length and 2 Angula in thickness diameter. WAS UH BTS anesrea, afaacies feast awa: Nadi Yantra comes with many openings (4 — 5) with different size, length, thickness etc. ARS oO EAT EMCAE COATT: aera ae aea ESS Moar HAT Many other tubular instruments may be prepared to observe the foreign bodies, depending on the shape, thickness and length of the part to be observed.14 Padma Karnika carataar ae weet qaraersaon adda ast ereaferaifacit act The tubular instrument having the shape of Padma Karnika — the round, flat central part of the lotus studded with small holes- at its top, twelve Angula — finger breath in length , with a hollow area of one fourth — it length is useful for catching and removing the foreign body.15 Page No. 291 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 6, Arsho Yantra avat aedarat weak TAS TA ag WasIe TA TATA YSseT TL FRAG TAS acrgsselewteyay, sdigget Rectaccatt a aged: The Arsho Yantra- the instrument to view the hemorrhoid inside the rectum. It has cylindrical shape. Its circumference is 5 Angula in men and 6 Angula for women; with two orifices- one at each end, useful for seeing the pile masses and with one slit shall be at its centre three Angula in length and of the size of the middle portion of the thumb in widths, about half Angula above the slit three shall be a karnuka — edge, (rim) 16-18 7, Samiyantra TI Agron Terat: wiser The instrument known as Samiyantra is similar- to the above but without the offices and useful for squeezing the pile masses. 19 The Nadiyantra to see the malignant tumor and piles, polyp of the nose shall be with one orifice, two Angula in length, Hae srrerlarss Pesarqed sraeat of the size of the index finger in thickness and resembling the instrument meant for rectal fistula. 20 Nadi Yantra to See Nasal Polyps, Piles ete UUIgeRaAnea aASTass era Weare TAK TeeaaTL, shall be with one orifice, two angula in length, of the size of the index finger in thickness, and resembling the instrument meant for rectal fistula. 8, Anguli Tranaka- finger protector Seah Steck set aT TALS TTL aateag aed acqarataged qe Page No. 292 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Anguli Tranaka- finger protector — is made from ivory / wood, 4 Angula in length, with 2 orifices- one at each end; shaped like the nipple of the cow and suitable to extend the finger (when in use). 21 9, Instrument to look into Vagina and Wounds Uferavrat AY HAY VsesTory FATS Tesi area rare eve Ud: UaaAled Ae Aakrraeqe The instrument to look into the vagina and wounds shall be hollow in the middle, 16 Angula in length, with four flaps held tight by a ring, resembling the bud ofa lotus in shape, fixed with four rods at its root — handling place and its mouth- opening like of the bud,. 22 Instruments to (10) oil sinus and (11) to wash it UA ATAMMIASTAAAA IST afecraearacit Aer 7a FESoP AMI saat sratis at Praeaqgaait Two instrument- one for oiling the sinus ulcer and the other for washing it shall be 6 Angula in length, having the shape of a Bastiyantra (enema nozzle) with an orifice at its root allowing the entry of the thumb and the orifice at its tip allowing round pea; without any edge, Rim at its tip and fixed with soft leather bag at its root. 23-24 14 12, Nadi Yantra for Udakodar/Ascies afaaant afer Peseafe aantat qRarceniqueater ferféveret serra Nadiyantra for use in Udakodara- ascites shall have two orifices- one at each end or it can be even the tube of a peacocks feather. 25 13, Shringa Yantra — Animal Horn PASTAS HAYS TIT Here eSATA aa artatead Gare qoarpica The Shringa- animal horn useful to suck shall have the orifice of three Angula at its root and that of mustard seed at the tip, eighteen Angula in length. The tip resembles the shape of nipple. 26 Page No. 293 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 14, Alabu- the hollowed gourd FASTA AACYSA YOON HIE MSs aa artatead dare qoarpia Alabu- the hollowed gourd will be twelve Angula in length and eighteen Angula in diameter with a round orifice of four Angula — in which, with a burning wick placed in its interior, useful for extracting Kapha and Raktha- blood. 27 Note — The procedure explained in Alabu yantra is called as cupping. Whenever vitiated blood or pus is to be extracted from a wound / ulcer, Alabu yantra is placed over the affected area and heated from outside. It expands, causing vacuum inside. This causes sucking action and the pus / vitiated blood gets sucked out. 15, Ghati — pot cedauel al ToHiseAeaaet TA Ghati- pot is similar and useful for making the tumors of the abdomen soft and raise it above from its low level. 27 2 16, Shalaka Yantra - set of instruments with rod like shape Tera AMT aeTHAH Her T BaaTATO ey ASAT HSALOT Shalaka yantra — set of instruments with rod like shape Rod like instruments are of many functions and shapes and size suitable to be purpose for which they are used. 28 38 mOgIEAS aaea: eeaeroh ARRackdra ad CATCH AS CAA SIT oF Of them, two are for probing, both having their mouth resembling that of an earth worm; two for removing foreign bodies from the channels having their mouths resembling a lentil, one of eight and the other of nine Angula in length. 29 17, Shanku Yantra — Hooks aga: Ve sat aut stseearaensactt eager afeonarat cat eercaraensaet aor eqserest arent sfSerecir Page No. 294 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shanku Yantra — hooks are six, among them two, (16 and 12 Angula in length), their mouth shaped like the hood ofa serpent, are meant for joining (the edges of wounds etc); Two more- one of twelve and the other of ten Angula in length, having the mouth resembling a Sharapunkha (bottom of arrow) meant for loosening the hard objects that are to be extracted. The size resembles a fish hook. 30-31 act st espe Gest weesHoi Ta: Berganacecat Fees FC eTaT: The hook known as Garbhashanku, is bent in its tip resembling a conch, 18 Angula in length and meant for pulling the impacted foetus in women. 32 18, Instrument for extracting the stone from the urinary bladder Instrument for extracting the stone from the urinary bladder, shall be shaped like the hood of a snake and bent inwards at its tip. 19, Instrument for extracting the tooth QRYSGAS Fedde TNS Instrument for extracting the tooth should have the shape of Sharapunkha (base of arrow) and is of four Angula — in length. 33 20, The rod- like instruments meant for clearing sinuses etc Hroraaearconer: erent: VE WaTstet The rod- like instruments meant for clearing sinuses etc. shall have their tip covered with a cap of cotton wool. 21, WAAAY SF Seg aa AMSAT Two others Nadi yantra (rod like instruments)- one of 10 and other of 12 Angula- in length meant for drawing the rectum near — by closing the things and extending it farther. 34 FS VEMCASTS UY, aa HE sreecrargaler Page No. 295 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Two other instruments, of six and seven Angula respectively for use in the nose; two of eight and nine Angula for use in the ears. 22, That meant for clearing the ear HUMANA ATA ed CCIGGE§ That meant for clearing the ear, with its edge like the leaf of the Ashwattha tree and face resembling a ladle. 35 23, Jambauvoshta- Cylindrical smooth stones MAIS A Soret at Weal T wan EOrs Boal EYSMETaTT Jambauvoshta- Cylindrical smooth stones- each three in number, thick, thin and long in shape be used for the application of caustic Alkalies and branding by fire — therapies. 24, That meant for use in international Hernia- in the scrotum Mea fey HeAMedgcdavsl T Aer aeleqahesaey That meant for use in international Hernia- in the scrotum shall have a round rod, bigger at its middle and upper portion and its root shaped like the half moon- 36. 25, Instrument meant for cauterizing the polyp HMI aAsacepa Instrument meant for cauterizing the polyp and tumors of the nose shall have its mouth similar to the cotyledon of the stone of Kola- Jujube fruit. 36 Serger freaysntecta: aby The tree for applying caustic Alkali therapy shall be eight Angula- in length, their mouths tips resembling the nails of the index, middle and ring finger- in size respectively. 38 FaearAie GAT AgYaeassaeMey, Page No. 296 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan those meant for clearing the penis / urethra and applying eye salve has been described at relevant places to be continued 26, Anu yantra- Accessory instruments:- HA AAA eS TATRA: RAHA AT Maa aM: let: Ue: HL: Gel aa eeu, afenar: sofacwastatcreiree fergor fea Accessory instruments are — the magnet, rope/ thread , cloth, stone, hammer, leather strap, intensive- of animals, tongue, hair, branches of trees, nails mouth, teeth, time, digestion hands, feet, fear and pleasure. They are used judiciously based on the assessment of disease and the patient. 39-40 Different functions of Yantra — Foret cratl eH eA OTA eee MT HSA et FPN AAAATAAMAASTCMA ATOM A eae Nirghatana- pulling out after crushing, unmathana- pulling out after twisting, Poorana- filling, Marga shuddhi- clearing the passage, Vyuhana- bringing together, Aharana — extracting, Bandhana- binding, Peedana- Rubbing, Achushana — sucking, Unnamana- lifting up, Namana- pushing down, bending down Chalana- shaking, Bhanga- breaking, Vyavartana- overturning, Rujukarana- straightening etc. are the functions of the Yantras- blunt instruments. 41 faadea atacand oT Tet Weleda T ATA | UT: HHA Wet TUTAY Hava Aer [I¥2 2/2 Among the blunt instruments Kankamukha Yantra, is the best as it can be twisted easily, dipped deep, can be held firmly, catches the objects firmly and is the authority in all places. It is indispensable. 42 Thus ends the chapter Yantravidhi- the 25" in Sutrasthana of Asthangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 297 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 26 Shastra Vidhi ereafafel Uses of Sharp Instruments Let us explore various sharg surgical instruments used in Ayurveda. This is the 26" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name Shastra Vidhi Adhyaya. Shastra means sharp surgical instrument. Shastra means sharp surgical instrument. Features of Sharp Instruments ugideta: qHakateante senate areafer Vararie her sTgetat sgaenfer TE ¢ FOTO FINI ay T HA HaRTeMfer Beara Aclert srafelt Hae z TARAS afenrrsitsteadiiet a AAMPTASI Heal Aieetigatey a Saran agate wontet vane iF a TN efaarer zosia afer Tarerfaelsa: what daared ees PUET Ucdadaeadaas deg fra HezE Pont a erctrenrsaforewresah aise PUTTER HAN TAME area Yea: Hal aH Woe SRT UAaeTEHAT ca SCHUTT Shastras- sharp instruments are 26 in number. Shastras should be prepared from skilled metal smiths, as per traditional method of preparing surgical instruments. They should be generally six Angula (fingers breadth)- long, capable of splitting the hair/shaving, good to look at, with sharp edges, good to hold firmly; The Yantras should not be of ugly shape. They should be prepared from well blown — removed of impurities strong steel like iron. Page No. 298 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The front of their mouth. i.e — the shape edges well hammered — to make them sharp, having the color of the blue lotus, with shape in accordance with their name, always ready at hand for use, their blades- cutting edges being 1/4", Vath or 1/8" of their own size (total length). Each — instrument two or three in number should be made use as suitable to the place site of operation. 1-4 Names of Shastras - Mandalagra, Vriddhiptra, Uttpala Patra, Adhyardha Dhara, Sarpa Mukha, Eshani, Vetasa Patra, Sarari Mukha, Trikurchaka, Kushapatra, Atavadana Atimukhi, Antrarvaktra, Ardha chandraka, Vrihimukha, Kuthari, Shalaka, Anguli Shastra, Badisa, Karapatra, Kartari, Nakha Shastra, Danta lekhanaka, Suchi, Koorcha, Khaja, the four kinds of Ara, and Karna vedhanaka- are the names of the twenty six sharp instruments. AVSAS hel AT Toteaecerarpiet Aaa Seer Alot Tearhreyosariey + gard aren de are oer Rodded ats wet T deraa4 aaa Foc aeieraars wears SMEATUINTE seat Saet Te TAA MARV AVIS Heer ser afaepar aeffascar ace cael Bred enateaeah PMlelaaed el SAAS FMAM: Hel 1, Mandalagra Shastra- knife with round edge at its tip has its edge in the shape of nail of the index finger, to be made use of for scraping and cutting-excision, in diseases like Pothaki- cyst in the eyelid, Shundika- Tonsils etc. 5 2, Vridhipatra- Scalpel is shaped like a boarders knife- Razor, useful for cutting, excision, splitting, incision and tearing/ separating, it, with a straight edge, is for use in elevated — bulging swelling, the same with its tip bent backwards, long or short edge for use in deep seated swelling. 6 3, Utpalapatra and 4, Ardha dhara- lancets are for the purpose of splitting and cutting. 7 5, Sarpyasya- Sarpamukha- serpent bladed scalpel is meant for cutting — excision of polyps in the nose and ears and has an edge of half Angula. Page No. 299 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 6, Eshani- sharp probe meant for exploring sinuses, is smooth and shaped like the mouth of an earthworm. 8 Another kind of Eshani- probe meant for splitting, has its blade like a needle, with a slit- hole at its root. 7, Vetasapatra is for puncturing; 8, Shararimukhi- shaped like a heron’s beak’s kind of scissors and 9, Trikuracaka — three spiked Brush like instrument are meant for draining out liquids. 9 10, Kushapatra- Razor resembling Blade of Kusha grass and 11, Atimukha- razor resembling the beak of a hawk are meant for draining, edge is two Angula — in length. TEATAAS TET Woes starsat tad 12, Antramukha — is meant for draining, its edges — 1.5 Angula in length and Shaped like half moon. 10 Aieart vast 7 afeaveraedey 13, Vrihimukha- with blade like a grain of rice, its edge being one and half Angula- in length and meant for Puncturing veins and the Abdomen. 11 Fe: PONT Marcrageeiseorete aaedeuser faedquaeean Feat PRL 14, Kuthari— Axe is thick, Stout, resembling a cow’s tooth, with edge of half Angula- in length and having a wooden handle; from this the vein situated on bones should be cut leeping the handle of this Axe vertically over it. 12 oat eer afaqe Aa peaarpia: Tosareren ae facet Page No. 300 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 15, Shalaka — rod made of copper, with two edges on either side shaped like the bud of Kurabaka, meant for piercing the lens in Linganasa- Cataract couching. 13 AfeaieTayes wet CAMS ToT TAA RAAT TATOO HA Wage TeraldNreredectsteet 16, Anguli Shastra- finger knife is prepared so as to have an orifice. Its edges are sharp, with its half Angula in width, resembling either Vriddhipatra or Mandalagra, in shape, capable of permitting the entry of the first Phallange of the index finger, is tied to the finger with thread and meant for excision and splitting of the diseases portion in diseases of the passage of the throat. 14-15 Fert asaraiestser erceteyey 17, Badisha- sharp hook with a bent blade is meant for holding enlarged Uvula, Arma- Pterygium etc. BE HEAT ATT I GUN aesayry faeat GeAGrd Faery 18, Karapatra- saw is meant for cutting of the bone, should have strong edge, of ten Angula- in length and width of two Angula, with fine- sharp, small teeth and with a handle to be held tight with the fist. 16 Para aat water 19, Kartari- scissors meant for cutting tendons, threads, hairs etc, is like scissors — which is commonly used by layman. aA Shays TaMET TAZA FERIA geserereartra get 20, Makhasa- Has cured or straight, edge, two bladed- shaped edge on both sides, nine Angula in length, to be made use for removing minute foreign bodies, excision, splitting and scraping. 18 CHU UAH Terapia da: araeaa dat eterdercerchar, Page No. 301 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan 21, Danta lekhanaka- dental lancet, has one edge four Angulas, Shaped like a knot on one side, is meant for scrapping the tartar on the teeth. 19 Gear Foret: Te fear: Beat ara Arak ARTA TERA SAAT STASI ATT FTAA AMA EAST AAT 22, Soochi-— needles for suturing/ swing is of three kinds; round, strong and sout; having — passing in through a hole in their body near its root; that for use in fleshy parts will have three edges and length of three Angula, for use in less flashy places, bony joints and wounds on joints, with a length of two Angula. 20 Higaea eda cranes a a UceAS AT Vrihimukha Soochi- curved needle is bent like a bow, meant for use- sewing/ suturing of instesties, stomach and vital spots and two and half Angula in length. 21 oe 2 oat) : gat qedenttoren: acarsel at Ysetret: H aoa afferpreagarreenay pet 23, Koorcha - brush with sharp spikes with round spikes fixed on one end, for seven or eight number and fastened well; it is used for scrapping in Nilika- blue patches, Vyangga- dark patches on the blade and loss of hair etce.22 ses aacdeiay: HTH: Wat: eat) Usa ALAA Me RATS 24, Khaja- churner has blade of half Angula in length and is of round shape, with eight spikes- fixed in it meant for removing the — vitiated blood from the nose by Churning with the hands. 23 cata Urea Biappa gy 26, Karnapali Vyadhna- instrument for puncturing the ear lobe should have its blade in the shape of bud of Yuthika- Jasmine. 24 SRT HUSAIN Tea Tate: TRE, TA faeteorm vrarraert Page No. 302 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Hore T ITH TeV ead 25, Ara- Awl, saw cutting plate has a round blade of half Angula below and four blades- edges above, it should bee used for puncturing swellings in case of doubt whether it is ripe or urine, as also — the earlobe which is thick. In case of thick earlobe a needle, hollow in three parts of it, three Angula in length is best for puncturing. 25-26 Anu Shatra — Accessory instruments:- oele: eage Hratererared: Sollee eA, aT T TrHeTe 2 Anushastras are - Jalauka — Leeches, Kshara — caustic Alkalies, Dahana — fire, Kacha — glass upala —cow dung cake nakha — nail stone, nail etc, which are non-metallic. Many other instruments may be designed as required for use in special operations and sites. 27 Shastra Karya — functions of sharp instruments- SCHAMA CAST AA ACMA LS TA det Hee cael Heat get qeea afew: Utpatana- extracting, Patana- tearing / splitting, Seevana- Suturing, Eshana- probing, Lekhana- scraping, Pracehhana- Scratching, incising, minute puncturing Kuttana- beating, hitting, pounding Chedana — excising, cutting, Bhedana- breaking, Vyadhana- Puncturing, Manthana- Churning, Grahana- holding, grasping and Dahana- burning, cauterizing are the functions of sharp instruments.28 Page No. 303 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Shastra Dosha — defects of sharp instruments:- PUST BUS ae] TAs Bea Aled aha: EAT GRAINS 3tseh ater: wa fctar: Kuntha — Bluntness, Khanda — brokenness, Tanu- thinness, Sthula — stoutness, Hrsava — smallness, Deergha — lengthiness, Vakrata — curvedness, irregular shape Kharadaratva — rough edge — are defects of sharp instruments.29 Shastragahana Vidhi:- Method of holding sharp instruments:- Bevea oeMs west Geawonea cee AeraSpSdecacgaaied: Rraraeniet Geared ceteasasehe T Ao Frat Tet Heya qu FY srewnatier paretatay so For Chedana (cutting), Bhedana (breaking) and Lekhana (scraping), the instrument should be held in Vrunta phalantara- between round woods handle and the edge, with the help of index, middle fingers and the thumbs, carefully; for Visravana (draining), it should be held at the tip of the round wooden handle with the help of the index finger and the thumb; For Pracchanna (scorching, scratching), the tip of the handle should be held with the palm. Vrihimukha Shastra should be held at is mouth tip; for extracting, the instruments should be held at their root; Others may be held in a convenient manner, as required in the operation. 30-32 Shastra Kosha- instrument wallet:- ReaaSTeaeaR: Foal Gate esse: faraecaer: ARG: Meese: MAHA MAHI: FAST: The instrument wallet should be 9 Angula width, 12 Angula in length. It should be made from jute, leaves, wood, silk, inner bark of trees or soft leather. It should be endowed with threads, well stitched with compartment for instruments, which should be kept wrapped in wool; Its mouth closed and held tight with a rod- acting like a bolt and pleasing to look at. 33-34 Page No. 304 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Jalauka- leeches- seleaed ofeat tecerarr arse Leeches should be made used of for letting out blood from happy persons Leeches are born in dirty water contaminated by putrifying dead bodies of fish, frog and snake or their excreta; DaIGHees AaierarHatciga: THM: Wa sy PONTVATe: TYfatesa: Srarquraraaearaay Vass TT: Bas ase UBT: HOST STATA: faeticarad at at Indrayudha type of leeches - Red, white or very black in color; Chapala — very active, thick and slimy, Poisonous Jalauka - Those which have Chitra — varied lines on their back, and Urdhvaraji — which are very hairy are Savisha- poisonous and so should be rejected. If used, they produce itching, ulceration, fever and giddiness, these- ailments are to be treated with drugs which mitigate poison, pitta and blood. 35-36 '2 Nirvisha Jalauka — safe leeches - feast: tact vara geo after SeauTare: PMT Peed: cel HEA: fies Galea ar: Those born in clean water, which are blue, round in shape, having blue lines in their back, rough/ hard back, thin body, slightly yellowish belly are Nirvisha- non poisonous- so can be used. 37-38 oT HT sara aA Geet oO feat Piafea: ufert wer teaaea sft aaa Even these, when they do not vomit the sucked blood fully, when they are applied frequently, and when they are inactive even after getting into water, should be considered as blood intoxicated and should be rejected. 39 Page No. 305 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Jalaukavacharana- procedure of applying leeches:- sR PeHenard HEA GAT: HaecaAy ash aT Grau sel ATA CAAT er Tat: Racdtetd THeUecaedeygana The leech that are kept for short time in water containing paste of turmeric / grain washed water (Avantisoma)/ buttermilk should be made comfortable by putting back in pure water. should be made to stick to the body of the patient. The leeches are attracted to the desired part of the body, by rubbing the part with ghee, mud, breast milk / blood or by making a wound with a sharp instrument. When it starts drinking blood by raising its shoulders, it should be covered with a soft cloth. HEPA GCYSEAM Setter SSA Bacd WIA se: a aiearea v3 apeareitfarcetey POTANAT TAMARA EL aaetasiaante waa stella: Thus stuck up, the leech will suck only the vitiated blood first from the mixture of vitiated and un-vitiated blood, just like the swan sucks the milk from a mixture of milk and water. 40-42 Application of Leeches mitigates diseases such as, Gulma — Tumors of the abdomen Arsha — Haemorrhoids, Vidradhi — Abscess, Kushta — skin diseases Vatarakta — gout, Galamaya,Netraruk — diseases of the neck and eyes, Visha — poison, Visarpa- herpes. Ete aera ate sugar ar Alea aaaed ay Ugo aaaa MTR CTHUSATRT TTL When pricking pain or itching develops at the site of the bite, the leech should be removed; they are then made to vomit the sucked blood by touching their mouth with salt and oil or by gentle rubbing in the direction of their mouth after smearing fine rice flour over them. 43 Vale LTA: Uae A aT AAT After making them vomit they should be protected from blood intoxication and should not be used again for seven days. Page No. 306 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Yaa Wea argh Havaed stetnarey FHA AA MATa Gated Ere Aa: After proper vomiting, the Leech regains its previous activity and becomes strong; by too much of vomiting it becomes very weak or may even die; If vomiting is improper, it becomes lazy, inactive and intoxicated. 44 FASTA TT: FATA IC A CATE GATT orogens BIT: KEEAeHaa They should be transferred from one pot to another, filled with good mud and water, in order to destroy- avoid putrefaction by saliva, excreta of leeches, because the Leeches become poisonous with such a contact. 45 ayet area eee RAMSAR: Ive I gailasattaaedat aoe eftcter: | When in doubt of impurity, the site of the bite should be made to bleed by applying paste of Haridra (Turmeric), Guda (jaggery) and honey. Later a piece of cloth soaked in Shata Dhauta Ghrita or cooling pastes prepared from drugs of cold potency should be applied — over the site. DNATA AEA Wares eT: With the removal of vitiated blood, the redness and pain subside immediately. 47 Hg aiolt Carticrydt Ted Toa SaEA ATA TEAM aaa: The vitiated blood, displaced from its site and accumulating in the interior of the wound becomes greatly sour by stagnating overnight; hence it should be expelled out again. 48 peuengaeat tet ede aI AMATMAT BooAed HAA A gourd or pot (cupping method) should not be used to remove the vitiated blood when the blood is vitiated by pitta, for they are associated with fire. It would further aggravate Pitta. They should be used in case of vitiation by kapha and Vata imbalance. 49 ater Gee SRN a ester fateetl HAA TAA AEM sve eestor frst Page No. 307 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The blood vitiated by Kapha should not be extracted by using a sucking horn (Shrunga) because of thickness of the blood, whereas blood vitiated by Vata and pitta should be removed by the sucking horn. 50 Shrunga is good for Vata and Pitta imbalance and not indicated in Kapha. Ghata is good for Vata and Kapha but not for Pitta. Pracchana — incising to produce bleeding:- ama sata eS Issd Vea a TAA FATTAASTATA ate TESTA, a Mevataaeae Te WAT The part of the body above the site, selected for bleeding should be tied tightly with a rope of leather scrap; Tendons, joints, bones and vital spots are avoided and Prachanna karma (scratching, incision) by sharp scalpel done from below upwards. It should not be done in horizontal direction. Weortanees ma aerseatsy: Repsmiee: qaraseaa eeaeh: Blood accumulated in any localized area- small area can be removed by Pracchana (scratching- incisions); Blood accumulated in tumors, abscess can be removed by using leeches; Blood that has produced loss of sensation- at the site of accumulation by using the sucking horn (shrunga) etc gourds or pot (Ghata) and that which is soared all over the body by venesection. 55 yeoret fafesd at Tare Haseatcitre: cared srorguenysat Ra cara safest arene at egatarcttenteng ie: Hea Or removal of blood by incisions is done when the blood is solidified; by Leeches when it is deep seated; by gourd, pot or horn when it is localized in the skin and by venesection when it is pervading the entire body; by using horn, Leeches, gourd for the seats of Vata and others- Doshas respectively.54 ware: veered: etc: Rarearaatra: Adlaanvg: wirped wastes Hatt After the bleeding procedure, the site of bleeding should be covered with cooling paste. This will reduce the pain, itching and oedeme at the site. The area should be bathed with warm ghee. 55 Thus ends the chapter- Shastra Vidhi- the 26" in Sutrathana in Astangahridaya. Page No. 308 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 27 Siravyadha Vidhi fazreaer fafa Venesetion (Blood Letting) Let us learn about ancient blood letting therapy of Ayurveda, its indications, procedure, side effects and so on. This is the 27" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name is Siravadha Vidhi Adhyaya. Sira means vein. Vyadha means puncturing. Shuddharakta Laksana- Features of pure blood:- AY oaut hist setae day TaeaMasaraerewchisaceda & Med WHE: Me ceteceta a feuic: Slightly sweet and salt in taste neither cold nor hot, resembling the colour of lotus, Indragopa insect, gold, blood of sheep and rabbit - are the characteristic properties of pure blood; It is the cause of origin of the body, by it, is determined the condition of body as healthy or unhealthy. 1-1 Effect of vitiated blood — Dushtaraka Karma- afcrceersac: wre asad Hed Aa: faattag hacctie loa ieerrcers a TeL FEAR Sea: POAT AAA AH CAE che sa EL asortaseeancdeimeaed F ae: aearaea &t Retaied a aT tetas: Blood usually gets vitiated by Pitta and Kapha. It produces diseases such as Visarpa- Herpes, Vidradhi — Abscesses, Pleeha — Disease of the spleen, Splenomegaly Gulma — Tumors of the abdomen - Agnisadana — Dyspepsia, Jvara — fever Mukha, Netra Shiroroga — diseases of the mouth, eyes and the head; Mada — intoxication- toxicity, Trut — excessive thirst Page No. 309 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Lavanasyata — salty taste in the mouth, Vatasra- Gout, Pittasra- bleeding disease, belching with pungent and sour tastes and dizziness. Those curable diseases, not getting cured even after appropriate cold or hot, unctuous or dry treatment should be understood as being born from aggravated blood. 1 2-4 2 In order to drain out the vitiated blood in these diseases veins should be cut. 5 Persons unsuitable for venesection — Siravyadha Anarha — a PaMsencttrd seq anyoney starrereateareaseaie tere ero START O RT TerenT SHOTS Aa aT HTT AL aera nieress te USea Soren here eaett Way Ta ISM HT aaera RT aetert frtgerergicra4ey afer etre sorar era Sear ar a Pa ee eTETL Who are less than sixteen and more than 70 years of age, who have had no bleeding previously — any time due to any cause, who have undergone excess gone Snehakarma and sweating therapies, those suffering from diseases of Vata origin, the pregnant woman, the woman in parturition, those suffering from indigestion, bleeding diseases, Shwasa (dyspnoea), Kasa — cough, cold Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery Udara — ascites, intestinal obstruction / enlargement of the abdomen, Chardi— Vomiting Pandu — anemia Chardi— Vomiting, dropsy; for those who have been given fat — ghee or oil to drink — as part of oleation therapy, and who are undergoing the Panchakarma treatment. The vein should not be cut without enforcing control on the body — as described further, that vein which is horizontal, that which has not been raised up; not on day which are very cold, very hot, very windy, or cloudy datys, venesection should not be done. 6-8 Page No. 310 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Selection of site of venesection- Vyadhana sthana nirdesha- RAaAHRY elea ATARI & STISTaTTATEaT aT HORT HTS ARINY ARTS FEAT ALATA: 80 dered aeNtry Tredtsosetarean: adaery srarnvrasayn: ar: ee RNTSMAAMCEM SHAT TEA Get: Seeeet aed at PART sreaefsretey #2 fasut orederer wredenemeciatecy qed sriaied cartes sereaqTyr °3 TAA efeteat sara crag Tera UPAgAY AG Seat Acasa: ey ae eye wereanged a TNSTel SHITE HTEA GAAS A TART &4 Beg Toney waeadf, aan mene areata Fagan Tella Aa ey Aaa aaret Ae seat carta RAT In diseases of the head and eyes veins situated on the forehead, outer angle of the eyes or the area around the nose should be cut; In diseases of the ear, the veins near the ear; in diseases of the nose, vein located at the tip of the nose; in Rhinitis, vein located in the nose and forehead, in Jaw or palate; in tumors of parts above the shoulders, vein situated in the tongue, lips, lower Jaw or palate; in tumors parts above the shoulders, veins at neck, ears, temples, or the head, in Jaw; in all diseases of the head usually vein situated in between the eyebrows; In Vidradhi (abscesses) and pain in the flanks, vein situated between the flanks, Axilla and breast; in fever of every third day (Truteeyaka), vein in the centre of the shoulders; in fever of every fourth day (chaturthaka) — that below the shoulder; in dysentery accompanied with pain vein situated two Angula away from the pelvis, in diseases of the semen and penis, vein situated in the penis; in glandular enlargement of the neck (Apachi), that situated in the thigh; in Gridhrasi- sciatica vein situated at four Angula below or above the knee joints; in Apachi (goiter) vein situated about two Angula below the indrabasti- a vital spot in the centre of calf muscle; in pain of thighs and Krostukasira (inflammatory swelling of the knee joint), Daha of the soleas, Khuda (gout) Padaharsa- (tingling sensation in feet), Vipadika — fissures of the feet, Vatakantaka (sprain of the foot/ Ankle) and Chippa (A diseases of the nails of the toes), vein situated two Page No. 311 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Angula above the Kshipramarma- vital Spot in between the big toe and the next toe; in Vishvachi- pain in the arms in the same way as that of Gridhrasi- sciatica should be cut. If the veins are hot visible, another vein situated at nearby place, which is devoid of vital spots should be cut. 9-17 Siravyadha vidhi- Venesection/blood letting rituals and procedure - ae faa soot seit pared: Persea reise: STATA deal Tela sea: AGIETCAP MEA STEM APA: aera aeansiea aed me ferdtsey SraOASACH WS DAT Wodt aeatedes aeqAacaea: aetnre ORC eTeaedaAase The patient who should undergo Snehana procedure. All the necessary equipments should be kept ready. The person should be strong, should perform Auspicious rites and consume meat-juice and boiled rice mixed with ghee, The person should be exposed to sunlight or fire for sweating. He is asked to sit on a stool of the height of the knee. A band of soft cloth should be tied around his head at the lower border of the hairs; He should keep elbows on his knees, His neck massaged briskly with fists in which pad of cloth is healed; Grinding the teeth, coughing, inflating the mouth to enlarge the cheeks, should also be done his body Trunk should be wound with a band of cloth, controlled — by knots at the back; His neck should also be tied with a band of cloth and _ tightened This is the mode of raising the deep seated veins. 18-22 ddl AeA HSTCA deat sesolayrcar asad Seyet Arca EIaMiear sgaysouisct: Horst meray oA SEAT eel Beret AT, dqged Alea Then the physician should tap the raised vein with his middle finger tripped off by the thumb; noticing the elevation, or raising it, once again by kneading it with the thumb; then holding the axe with his left hand, place its edge on the middle portion of the vein and give up in the Axe without Shaking. Page No. 312 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Axe should be lifted up in the same way, tapping and kneading the vein for making more blood to come out. 23-24 FSSA AACATY AHA T ATA The vein- of the nose should be cut with the Vrihimukha Sastra- the Lancet with its face shaped like a grain of rice after raising the tip and the surrounding areas of the near with the thumb. 25 Ho Yrot lle Sera oe AAT ACTA, The vein situated underneath the tongue, be cut by asking the patient to keep the tip of the tongue raised and biting it holding it firmly by the upper row of teeth. 25 4 qeaictaaaeesg srataaRnreaed Ursrerasiecaet oa Tad sora Aled fardaaeledusa For cutting the veins of the neck, they should be raised by manipulating the area above the breasts, the patient is made to hold a stone in each of his fists and keep the shoulders on his knees and outstretched; the body is massaged commencing with the pit of the stomach in the upward direction and then the vein is cut. 25 2-27 faeriereaRer sera irarcarpay x 3 R qatar Galfasera Hers os iaorey wed qegueera WeHt TSAA The veins of the hand be cut, when the patient is sitting comfortably, keeping his arm straight without bending at all elbow, clenching the first with the fingers folded inside, a band of cloth tied, four Angula above the site of cutting. 28-28 2 TaeaerraraAerear args uredat: Fart West Agel ASMA Aeapirad The veins of the flanks be cut, by keeping the arms hanging loose; Those of the pains when it is flaccid; those of the calves when the leg, four Angula above the site of cutting. 29-29 4 We ¢ West serecisoreaedherhsa Te RMA ow AO ars aay afade pirad Petraes eeddeda: qatar Tecate Page No. 313 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Those of the feet be cut, when the feet are kept steady, the foreleg is massaged briskly from the knee downwards towards the Ankle with the hands, tying a band similar to the method described for hand, the other leg is kept slightly bent. 30-31 seUAgrAay eva ay ay yedty acceserarad Thus the clever physician should adopt such methods of raising the veins appropriate to the places, by the techniques that are not mentioned here. 32 Aree faeces dears dear warerareeareTahy Rent faeeet porary On fleshly parts, the Vrihimukha Sastra (Lancet) should be used and the vein cut to the size of a tice grain only; the veins on the bones should be cut the size of half a (Yava) barley by using the axe. 33 Samyak Viddha Lakshana waftaal went It Ard T at wad When the cutting is proper, the blood flows out in a steady stream and stops when the control (tourniquet) is released. Asamyak Biddha Lakshana eTHea TecTed afar doreutet: When the cutting is inadequate; the flow is only for a short time and less in quantity; Then it should be rubbed with oil mixed with lime powder to promote more bleeding; Ati Biddha Lakshana wesqafatdal aad Geet oid When the cut is more, the blood flows out with a sound and stops with great difficulty. 34 Asruti Karana:- causes for non- flowing:- at arora aeaproweatageds: aTAcaaTaeael TEA tad Sa: Page No. 314 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Fear, fainting, loose tourniquet, blunt instruments, over- satiation (excess eating), debility, patent urges- of urine, faeces etc, absence of sweating therapy- are the causes of absence of blood flow. 35 sara vata aeacarsfereneta: PUTA AAA HEATER ARTEAGA BT dda aaa a When the blood is not flowing out in sufficient quantity, the cut end of the vein should be smeared with oil processed with Vella (Vidanga), Vyosha (Trikatu), Haridra, Nata, Agaradhuma or Lavana, when the blood is flowing out properly, the site should be smeared with warm oil and salt. 36-37 He wate Geers Sarenied Hier Vitiated blood flows out first, just like the yellow- juice form the second seeds of Kusumbha- before its oil flows out. TIT Cas fasseae aici aera Afier sufficient bleeding, the flow stops by itself; it should be considered as pure, unvitiated blood and further flow should not be attended. 38 Get fare Fearn aifsrd eaart: Wa: waded TETAS HT aT If during the time of bleeding, the patient faints, then the touriniquet should be released, he should be fanned with fans to make him conscious and bleeding continued. If he faints again, blood letting should be postponed to the next day or third day. 39 Dushtarakta Lakshana- characteristics of impure blood — Aaa LaTASTT BAF Seraria sreathferoray Blood vitiated by Vata, will be blue or crimson in color, dry- nonslimy, flows with force, clear and frothy; Tica trad fraarenetivarceaiegaa Yo Blood vitiated by pitta will be yellow or black, has foul smell, not thick because of increase of heat and mixed with glistening particles, appre Peatser sag deqacateset Wet Page No. 315 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Blood vitiated by Kapha will be unctuous, pale -yellowish- white in color, has small threads, is slimy and thick; Beppe Taal Aas Atenas By combination of 2 Doshas, there will be mixed features. Blood vitiated by all the Doshas will be dirty and thick. 40-41 Srava pramana- Quantity of flow:- seat afer 3s 7 Wea aL sfeget fe Acq: FA a wee: TARASTHARTET ACA AIST Vitiated blood more than one Prastha- (768 ml) should not be allowed to flow out, even in strong persons; Excess bleeding will lead to either death or dreadful diseases of vata origin. In such condition, oil massage and drinking of milk mixed with blood are the treatment. 42 Ye wad wetierarete Raregen vated deteldted sete Rea After the flow of blood, the controls should be removed slowly, the site washed with cold water, the cut end of the vein covered with a cotton swab soaked in oil and bandaged. 43 ae urea ga: aera HT at ARTEPACSES TANGA I Vrqi TTA Vitiated blood should be removed again either in the same evening or next day; if the blood is found greatly vitiated with more quantity of Doshas. It should be removed again after a fortnight, after administering Snehana therapy. 44 fatrate oe qsere ata tat siferacct arsacaal art a Ura iaarL Ifa small residue of vitiated blood inside, diseases do not get aggravated and so it can be allowed to stay, but excess flow of blood should not be attempted. 45 Rosman: I waera att orate Pccraferarerre rarer: Ge WrdHeinrdAaaa TaTea Page No. 316 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Such residual blood may be removed by making use of the sucking horn (Shrunga)ete. or it can be purified of doshas by administering cold comforts, therapies prescribed for Raktapitta (bleeding diseases), purification therapies (Panchakarma) etc. and by methods of making the body thin. Even the blood which is mildly vitiated by the Doshas but not increased in quantity should be treated by these methods. 46-47 te cafesotd fart carscitaraticnaey | datagyacagarvascasasthes: | Fea aNcaTsH: | feeder usrenefet Fac | aaa at PANT fatdecaeicdAlete RA | IAS at cARA Secacaeehar II If the bleeding does not stop, methods to stop it should be adopted; the orifice of the wound should be smeared with the powder of either Rodhra, Priyangu, Pattanga, Masha (black gram), Yashti (licorice), Gairika, Mritkapala (pot shred), Kshana Masha, ash of flax or of the bark and sprouts of trees with milky Sap by cold infusion prepared from drugs of Padmakadi Gana — vide chapter 15 should be taken as a drink; the same vein should be cut again and the ends of the vein should be touched with a red hot rod. (cautery) with a red hot rod. 48-50 SAME Geaisrad Taeadaited Yeet aaa ae: Wesel SAY WeaedaedenaeRas AL Because of tourniquet application, the Doshas temporarily get aggravated and may move to the other parts of the body. After the tourniquet is removed, they will come back to their normal places. But till such time, one should adhere to only healthy foods and activities. 51 AGUA El AeA Let AeA HEAT TTT cer ek eaeraterarpnisriaerniete vette: Foods which are neither very hot, very cold, which are light (easy to digest) and stimulating hunger are suitable after the removal of blood. This is because, after blood letting procedure, the body will be unstable with low digestion activity. 52 Features of Persons with Non-vitiated (Pure/Healthy) Blood Weert wlircd sequel freaerdHeaed Tea | Galiead Weacited fayeted Yer dafed 11531 Excellence of color and complexion, improved power of the sense organs, good perception of objects by sense organs, good digestive activity, enjoyment of comforts endowed with good nutrition and immunity- are the characteristics of the person having non vitiated blood. 53 Thus ends the chapter named Siravyadha Vidhi- the 27th chapter is Sutrasthana of Astanga Hrudaya. Page No. 317 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 28 Shalya Aaharan Vidhi erea3tewr ater Removal of Foreign Body This chapter deals with different techniques that were used in ancient times for foreign body removal. During ancient times, during war, arrows, and other sharp instruments were used. Hence, this topic had special significance. This is the 28" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name is Shalya aharana Vidhi. Shalya means a foreign body. Aharana means extraction, pulling out etc. Shalya gati - direction of entry of foreign bodies- arafeayede: reset wader ae: Vakra — Irregular — curved, Ruju — straight, Tiryak — horizontal, Urdhwa — upward and Adha — downward are the five Shalyagati (directions of movement of the foreign bodies) Shalya Vrana - ulcer with a foreign body inside:- tart wUtpestdect MBI Ag: weed gegeaicuestayst TO FGA vo eaeed: Med FARA: Blue discolouration, swelling, pain, frequent bleeding, elevated like a bubble, studded with eruptions and softening of muscles are the features from which a wound having a foreign body should be recognized. 1-2 fader casera ered faavt: afsarea: arnt stafa araed ars: ear faada serarara we: eresarsit at Veter Red Ada way fea Tvak gata — When the foreign body is in the skin, there is discoloration, hard and large swelling; Mamsagata (when it is in the muscle), there will be sucking pain, steady progress of the swelling, tenderness, suppuration and non- healing of the wounds of entry of the foreign body; Page No. 318 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan when it is in between two muscles (Peshi) the signs will be similar that residing inside the muscle except the swelling 3-4 HAT: FAA WT EAE ca Rarearet Rarer Fama: FM Brat Bakes feat gaara afte ed thetraqeRaT & faalia weqatel FAeT Fools: AsaTaaet: asast soaeeraieuacd sera w Aperval HME wt: caged Beet User fergicded Ade Bela: HSA ¢ 3earet Hearerpeara tet a Wale Peqmeatad wed Aaftetraarct: < wered a oftera: caomfey fester Snayugata shalya (tendons) — Convulsions, shock, stiffness, loss of movements and severe pain are the symptoms when the foreign body is in tendons. when foreign body is in the tendons and is difficult to remove; Siragata shalya (veins) — there is distention of the vein; when lodged in the veins, there is distention of the vein; Srotogata Shalya (body channels) — there will be loss of their respective functions and qualities, Dhamanigata shalya (arteries) — bleeding with frothing, chest discomfort, nausea and body ache; Sandhiagata (joints) — severe shock, pain and filling up of different types of fluids and swelling Asthigata (bones) — the signs are the same, with loss of movement also. Koshtagata (abdomen) — there will be distention and appearance of food faecal matter and urine at the orifice of the wound. Marmagata (vital spots) — appearance of signs of injury to such spots. In addition to the general signs, enumerated so far, even their discharges- fluids coming out from them such as Lasika (Lymph) from skin, Rakta (blood) from veins and Arteries, Majja — marrow bones etc. should be observed. 5-9 VEU YaceIAT Aaa FT at arrnrnsreraeatergar HTT arerct Page No. 319 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan If foreign body is lodged in persons who have pure body — purified with therapies such as Panchakarma and if the foreign body enters in the same line of the organ, the chances of healing are good. If the body is not purified, it produces serves distress due to aggravation of Doshas. 10 Recognizing the site of foreign body beneath the skin — casast BT AF eReagaedanaet: Was BA dss facitaa HY Psat AM AAceAMet MeAIIeT ARUTSS AYA Hlareosswed TAL atenarniefat: ged werd aqaed a STRATA Sareea Tet sete: FER poded: Aiesearse TAT HSA The exact site of foreign bodies concealed in the skin, is recognized by The appearance of redness, pain, burning sensation and tenderness after anointing with oil, fomentation or massage; by the melting of solid ghee, placed at the site, by quick drying of the paste of sandal wood ete. ase TARR aeasaaay TAT ger aaedcteder AF eocrAedl, Site of foreign body concealed in the muscle, joint and abdomen — canbe recognized by clearing looseness, thinness of the muscles by Panchakarma therapies or by other methods of slimming the body and then observing for sites of pain, redness etc. The site of those concealed in the bones is recognized by anointing with oil, fomentation, tying with rope or bandage squeezing and massaging; The sites of those concealed in the joints by extending or folding of joint in addition to signs similar to lodged in bones. Sites of those concealed in tendons, veins, channels and arteries are recognized by appearance of pain in such places, in a horse chariot, with broken wheels. HAASE Yeselad AMT ATA Features of those concealed, in vulnerable spots are not described separately because such spots are composed of muscles and other tissues only- the features of which have been described already. Page No. 320 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan ware Feet J aise Haar wep Generally the site of the foreign body is determined by the appearance of distressing symptoms, abnormal movements etc. during activity and by the presence of pain. 17 Fect FY USAT Rye a Wana: HEAMeAAEAT TPA Tarsraad The shape of the invisible foreign body is determined by the shape of the wound, such as round — circular wide, with four Angula, with 3 edges. Etc.18 Shalyaharana- removal of foreign bodies:- asec afcrottaretetarcnt adriterrrdia Perce fara Method of their removal are though upward and downward directions; those entering into the body from above and below should be taken out in the opposite directions respectively. 19 Fart waResca qatar Bt Those which have entered from sideward — horizontally should be removed by cutting it conveniently. 19 ee at PATTER: HAMAS ATTA LATA oie Aeqes sea WHE FT aq aaeviareseat ASS aT fereIgaT Foreign bodies, arrowheads which are lodged in the chest, axillae, groins and Flanks, which can be cut and which have board blades should be pulled out. Shalyas that should not be removed - Those which lead to death soon after their removal, which are lost / invisible, which are absorbed by the body and those which do not produce complications- should not be removed. 20-21 Aharana Vidhi- means and methods of removal eee Rerigrepratttenchecantetet: Page No. 321 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Those which can be held with the hand should be removed by the hand itself. While others which are visible should be held by instruments such Simha- lion faced Varmimukha- fish faced, karkata mukha —crab faced etc. 22 HEU TC ATeMe El Mra Ad: HSH YSME AHA AA eAet Those which are invisible but can be grasped by instruments, through the wound, should be pulled out by instruments having faces like the Kankha — heron, Bhringa- Shrike, Kurara- osprey, Sharari- a kind of heron and Vayasa —crow. 23 AeCMIA TAMA ANIA AL BL ater g acta: ete eefarreay Those which are lodged in the skin should be removed with the help of Sandamhsa- Yantra (forceps); Those which are hollow, with the help of Tala Yantra- instruments with flat discs, Those which are lodged in hollow spaces, by using Naraka Yantra- tubular instruments and the rest by other convenient instruments. 24 geaur at faerearat dat frafed sort Pea Yea ALAA Tear Haare eT Those which cannot be held by instruments should be removed by cutting open the site with sharp instruments, the wound is next cleared of the blood, soaked with ghee, fomented and then bandaged; The patient is advised to follow the prescribed regime — described in verses. 30-42 of the next chapter. 25 Peg fae J Ueaca eer Those lodged in the veins and tendons — including nerves, should be pulled out after loosing them with the help of Salaka — rod like instruments. Fed At Most WAT RAK geN ad: CMa Wea eae aeaT ATL, TAT GTHT Head HAIL If foreign body is in the chest (Hrudaya), patient should be sprinkled with ice water (himambu). 26-27 situase at ogar tisfacar fatreta grad Fates: Epes fg: Page No. 322 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Foreign body, arrow head, lodged in the bones should be removed by holding the patient tight by the legs of the physician, if not possible by this method, it should be pulled out by attendants who are strong. 28 wer seared aga ashlar ees GAIA Tragsa ast: HAT 31 TA arsttete Hele steteraaet Ber SErrGeaA, If not possible even by that method, the tail end (feather tied end of the arrow) should be bent and fastened tight to the string of a bent bow, and the bow tied to the bridle bit of a horse should then be whipped so that it raises its head suddenly and with force by this method the arrow is removed. 29-30 Ud aT Mara HewtecRy ACEA GITANS PAB: eeaarera Likewise, the branches of trees may be made use of; in case of arrows with thin or fragile tail ends, thin bamboo poles can be made use. 31 ways aeyctiga yea: Feed aga eraieatcaesct StL Tf the tail end of the arrow is surrounded by an elevation, it should be pulled out after cutting off the elevated part suitably; if the arrowhead has caused a bulging on the body, it should be removed with the help of a Nadiyantra (tubular instrument) after shaking / hitting the bulging with a hammer.32 Ra Ue AAAAT aes gq aa Alecar apie aot asa fares at By the hammer, the arrow which has no clear passage of exit, should be brought into a passage, suitable for pulling out; Those which have earlike projection should be pulled out after cutting off their ears or by fixing them inside tubular instruments. 33 saeHiede feral Pagar erry The arrow heads without earlike projections, which have created a wide opening in the body and lodged straight, can be removed by making use of a magnet. Gerard ered favor fatereta Page No. 323 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Foreign bodies which have entered the large intestine can be removed by inducing purgations. 34 Veaaiayedeasctaene Ft: Bad air- gas, poison, breast milk, blood, fluids etc. which are acting foreign bodies should be removed by sucking by using animal horn (Shrunga) etc. 34 2 Hoare wed YF HVS waeda faded cd: wed fad Wa wa Ra If the foreign body has gone into the passage of the throat, a lotus stalk / sponge like portion, tied with a thread should be passed into the throat, and when the foreign body gets stuck to the stalk, the thread should be pulled out slowly. 35 agar sfsetntat PAcaerennraeeentparey HAASAATY HVT AT TMAAT TA If the foreign body in the throat is made up of Lac, a heated iron rod should be passed through a tubular instrument and made to touch the foreign body and then removed out; those which are not made of Lac should be removed by making use of food smeared with Lac, at its tip. 36 aelegaet Td aa: HoeHenfari AEM Pssst AAA: cet TANT Thorn like, hook like bodies — which are in the throat should be removed by inserting a ball of hair fastened with a thread, making the patient vomit the water which he has been made to drink earlier, the foreign body sticking to the ball of hair during vomiting is removed by pulling the thread quickly . In the same way hair and other foreign bodies should be removed by making use of the hook. 37 TIT FEATS Kat eT Those foreign bodies which are lodged in the mouth and nose, if not possible to be removed out though respective orifices, should be pushed back, making them to enter into the wider tract. 38 HOTACH UTA TRAICT Waa Ifa bolus of food is stuck up in the throat, it should be removed by using thread, cloth of flax, silk, hair or water. 39 FRAT ata STL Page No. 324 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan The person who has swallowed water to his full stomach — by drowning should be held with his head down and legs up and shaken well, on laid on the round with the face bent down and then made to vomit all the water; he should then be immersed in heap of ash. 40 aera searrelt a1 fermereoey If the ears are full with water, it should be removed inserting the finger and oil removers put into the ears or the ears should be kept facing downwards and the head given the blow from the side. Or the water can be sucked out with the help of tubular instruments 41 ae Batata HoiqKaeaa ese Becat a Bwalcter AA slant fake: If any insect has entered into ears, the ears should be filled with warm salt water or sour gruel (Sukta), when the insect is dead, dehydration measures should be adopted or the ears should be filled with water. 42 ogy saerateedst w Faecal SSAUT WA: wes agatet facia Foreign bodies of Lac, and other metals remaining for long time inside the body get dissolved the heat of the body. 43 ACME SMeAeraaAA Teter a fasrordvarrccaeed Fart wear feioadt ate Tame Torqsir Foreign body composed of Mud, Bamboo, wood, horn bone, tooth and hair of animals or man, stone do not get dissolved by body heat; Those composed of horn, Bamboo Iron, wood of palm tree or remaining for long periods inside the body generally get distorted, remain un-dissolved and produce putrefaction in the muscles and blood . 44- 44 2 wed Aras Aes aait a facead eon retg Wate aT EATS Tet: Wafaeal Slesed TWeetyursaet: If the foreign body is concealed deep inside fleshy parts, purification should be created in such parts by squeezing, fomentation, thinning measures and smoothening therapies, use of strong, hot poultices warm foods and drinks, incising and other methods, of sharp instrumentation, trampling by feet etc. and then the foreign bodies removed by excision, probing or cutting. 45-46 Page No. 325 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan MeATS MAKATI ET SEOTAA aecorebifaarey west aqua seta Keeping in mind the different and peculiar features of the foreign bodies, their place of lodging and instruments of removal, the intelligent physician should recognized them and remove them by appropriate methods. 47- 47 2 Thus ends the chapter named Salyaharana Vidhi- twenty eighth of Sutrasthana of Astanga Hrurdaya. Page No. 326 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 29 Shastrakarma Vidhi emeanat fafer Surgical Procedures This chapter explains about different surgical methods and operations of ancient times. This i the 29" chapter of Ashtanga Hrudaya Sutrasthana, written by Acharya Vagbhata, son of Vaidyapathi Simhagupta. The chapter name is Shastrakarma Vidhi. WoT: BsaTA WT: Wea eaayTaaT AAAI CATATARTeL We We cotct: ° Due to Paka (suppuration) of inflammation, Vranashotha (inflammatory ulcer) develops. Hence, swelling should be treated first, preventing the formation of pus, by all efforts, such as Susheeta lepa — application of cold poultices, Seka — bathing the part with cold decoction of drugs, Asramoksha — blood letting, Samshodhana — Purifying Panchakarma therapies. 1. Trividha Sopha — three stages of swelling :- Shopha — Swelling is of three types. Ama shopha — unripe, raw, initial stage, without pus formation Pachyamana shopha — with symptoms of inflammation, initial stage of pus formation Pakva shopha — with full pus formation. FT: PeaAA WA: TWH easyer AAA CATAL We Wea cated: Ama shopha — (unripe swelling) mild with slight heat and pain, The swelling will have the same colour as the skin. The swelling is immovable. 2. verre faavied welt afeaRarda: Fea saequcaisd araceateane: Pachyamana shopha - Vivarna — The swelling gains a different color than that of the skin. Ragi — it is usually red coloured. Bastiriva — It enlarges like an animal bladder. Nistoda — continuous bursting type of pain, Angamarda — aches all over the body, Vijrumbhika — excess of yawning, Samrambha — different kinds of distressing symptoms, Page No. 327 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Aruchi — anorexia Daha — burning sensation all over the body Usha — increased temperature Trut — excessive thirst Jvara — fever Anidra — loss of sleep, quick melting of solid ghee placed on the swelling and intolerance to touch — tenderness just as in an ulcer 3 — 4. Pakva Shotha — ripe swelling is Gad Hous Follfet: TUgAT aferaesra: aTAY aedyeaiaaes Hugeitnre Area Fst TAT Bea saqarliaa4reere: Alpavegata — mild in nature, Mlani— reduced in size, Panduta — white colour, Valisambhava — has wrinkles on it, depressed all round but elevated at its centre Kandu — itching Shopha — mild swelling, Mardava —softness, movement of pus can be understood by touch just as movement of water in a bladder. 5. Doshawise symptoms in Shopha - Yet ac arfetora, ate: Picea, ait: Hea INE Il Wel Teared Ue: CAact are: Beera: | Shula — pain due to Vata Daha — burning sensation due to Pitta imbalance Shopha — inflammation due to Kapha imbalance Raga — redness and Paka — suppuration due to Rakta vitiation. 6. ore aicded sicraieceeaselwariara: aenerrrard: vara: eeraTreTceee: When pus formation further increases with lapse of time there is cavity formation inside the swelling, the skin becomes thin and destroyed by the Doshas, it is covered with wrinkles, black in colour and body hairs fall off. 7. Hay q airey re ice WHAaTs Grates det HEqS Ta Taresraeita Page No. 328 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan TaRMAVS Lait 3eUed TarealeareAa Tera Ged Wat Aras: If the swelling produced by predominance of Kapha, ripening takes place slowly, hence signs of ripening do not manifest clearly, the swelling which is cold to touch, of the same colour as of the skin with milkd pain, hard to touch, like a stone. IT is also known as Raktapaka.8 — 9. Shastra Karma Vidhi— Procedure of surgical operation:- HC Hat Te Tae seated aRu AAEeCae ead Wear Wet In persons with weak mind, who are debilitated, in children, or when the swelling is elevated by accumulation of pus, when it is located on vulnerable spots, joints etc., the treatment is Darana — making the abscess burst by application of Alkalies (Kshara) whereas in other cases except the above, the treatment is — Patana - cutting open by sharp instruments. 10. ares RARreTyeaaal sreaticrafer: volt afeaghaeeet faact ar atcitear: faSorcted: Yet: Ta: RRA Tas fagat cefa fet quicateartera: Cutting an unripe swelling leads to diseases of the veins and tendons, profuse bleeding, immense pain, tearing of the skin or Visarpa (spreading ulcers). The pus remaining inside and increasing in quantity, quickly burns away the veins, tendons blood and muscles just as — spark of fire burns away a hay stack. 11 — 12. UC CSACTAA ANCA TIT TTA earafad feat arafataaarhot The surgeon who by ignorance cuts open an unripe swelling and he who neglects a ripe swelling — without cutting open — both should be considered as mean surgeons performing indiscriminate acts. 13. Purvakarma — Pre-operative procedures:- Wee werHeATVasS sHloeraaT A et Weaeaee decor at daar: Page No. 329 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan T ASAT: MET a seat Before undertaking surgical opening of an abscess the patient should be given the food he likes; The person accustomed to alcoholic drinks may be given a drink of strong wine which makes him withstand the pain. 14-15. HUT FETs AAMT TL, Except for those patients suffering from obstructed delivery, renal calculus, diseases of the mouth and the abdomen — such patients should be given neither food nor wine before the operation. 15%. Pradhana Karma - operation proper:- HUAI FET: WSLS Haat yeakica sey eae AA Tare Heo AeA erage et apedetcded Next, keeping all the equipments required, the physician should make the patient sit facing east. Sitting in front of him and facing him, the physician should incise the swelling with his well sharpened instrument, Incision being made in the direction of the hair — downward, avoiding vulnerable parts, deep enough till the pus is seen, and then removing the instrument quickly. 16 — 17 Wad CAST HAITI oA SIS oA Used aeaiyoa wa: Airway HoeTaaAAeA TATA TATA adt ae aie faeaigraseat wa aa a ar ar aot Parcalasrect ferrereey wad wo faenet a ser art a fasofa If the area of pus formation is great, the incisions may be either one, two or three Angula — (fingers breadth) apart; The interior is then thoroughly excavated with either a probe, finger, tube or hairs of animals, as appropriate to the site and area of the swelling, The pus path is determined, cutting through the bulge of the wounds, creating a well cleaned, wide and deep wound so that no vitiating material can remain inside. 18 — 20. Page No. 330 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan reader aor — Characters Desired in a Surgeon aks srefrar cdlevt ered arede Fae 112211 seFAteea dques weraaitr ees | Shaurya — Courage, Ashukriya — quickness of action, Teekshna shastra — keeping his instruments very sharp, Asveda — not sweating A vepathu — not trembling, Asammoha — not getting confused these are the qualities best desired of the 21. piernentargelvoattersreragarct t g sear Sefer Rerearefaneeey Tiryak Cheda — The incision should be made horizontally curved in places such as the forehead, brows, gums of teeth, shoulders, abdomen, axillae, eye sockets, lips, cheeks, throat and groins; horizontal incision, in other places might lead to cutting of the veins, tendons etc. 22 — 23. Sastrakarmottara Vidhi-— Paschat Karma — post-operative procedures Mest HAAN area: effaresifarea Vero Rares Wet sgafout GGA ToT ca: anaRical HIT coltdarrst soe 7 IparaetesesroNaM edt: eicrgycien freartyacaa: PoHoHsTA ead Aste a fever aft cat qearedtarcareatea a Yared: ware iareated Ue Haferet dd: Pres Yea aes THATS A Oeg Hed HAA a aeeaesta TT After removing the sharp instruments, the patient should be comforted with encouraging words and cold water; The area all around should be squeezed, The wound is washed with decoction of drugs Moisture is removed by wiping with cotton wool. The wound should be fumigated with the smoke of Guggulu, Aguru, Siddhartha, Hingu (Asa foetida), Sarjarasa, Patu (Salt), Sadgrantha(Acorus calamus) or leaves of Nimba (neem), mixed with ghee; Page No. 331 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Then a wick prepared from paste of Tila, ghee, honey and appropriate drugs should be placed inside the wound and also covered over. A thick plaster prepared from corn flour and ghee is put on and bandaged with a thick sheet of cloth, winding it either from right to left or left to right but not from either top or bottom. 24 — 28. afayereal: Vel: dea: Atrchieyar: afta Fea: wren feta at fear: The bandage cloth should be clean, thin and strong; the medicinal wick should consist of cotton threads which are fumigated, soft, smooth and devoid of folds, these are beneficial to the ulcers. 29. patra TET Vert Lanter afet araetccsa: Ulcer should be protected from the invasion of bad evils (microbes), insects, flies which feed on blood. They should be offered oblations. 30 Fal Atal wT URAL aeat Weatae teat sera qa oaafceaat gat Rerstareanht aa: trefereled Tea Taree feaeaed TOY HUST AHA The patient should always wear on his head, potent herbs such as Lakshmi, Guha, Atiguha, Jatila, Brahmacharini, Vacha, Chatra, Atichatra, Durva or Siddharthaka. He should be made to follow the regimen prescribed for the day of oil drinking as part of Snehana therapy; sleeping during day leads to production of itching, redness, pain, swelling and pus in the ulcer. 31 — 32. ein ¢ rafericateteteatercrga Wee Coa SAey arsrerret HATTA Remembrance, touch and sight of women, which produce ejaculation of semen leads to other bad effects of intercourse, though not indulged into actually. 33. WT MIWA FT WALT SINT at a eH o feareaicares Ayes Ayer Swelling gets increased in an ulcer by strenuous activities, Redness increases by keeping awake at night, Pain by sleeping during day; death occurs by indulging in copulation. Page No. 332 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Diet after surgery — aloe U WaIcea Faas isecnr: FRR Aaa rottae trea fer roUrse: TAF AHA A HAUSA THAT HAL, PRACT HHL CA AHS TL dead aise at yd ata et oer stenrcaiest Parser eresoentcRA spate sigaretare: efter aoraatefet The food of the patient should be that which is accustomed such as barley, wheat, rice of sixty day ripening (shashtika shali), Masura — lentil, Mudga (green-gram), Tuvari — (tur dal), Jivanti, Sunisannaka, tender Mulaka (Radish), Vartaka, Tanduliyaka, Vastuka, Karavella (biiter gourd), Karkota, Patola (Pointed gourd) , Katukaphala — fruit of Katurohini, Saindhava (Black salt), Dadima (pomegranate), Dhatri (Amla), Ghrita (ghee), water boiled and cooled. Mess prepared from old rice added with fats consumed in little quantity along with meat of animals of desert — like regions, followed by drinking of warm water helps for the quick healing of ulcers. 34 — 36. HN AGA Fret VAT Aa OAT Aa solviccafrardent fasrat aeratel saat AeA: MPSA TETAS TAAT ATL, Food, to be consumed in limited quantity at the appropriate time and which is healthy, undergoes digestion properly, Indigestion by over eating etc. leads to disorders of Vata and other Doshas which might be powerful so as to cause increase of swelling, pain, putrefaction, burning sensation and distention of the abdomen. 37 — 38. Food to be avoided — ad Urs fot AM Act AMASTS TAA arepfapdarre aa Heh Ast aeaeaere fasefrar face aye errr wat He aatemieart: AaelTpd Fresh grains, Tila (sesame), Masha (black gram), wines, meat other than of animals of desert like regions, products of milk and sugarcane, substances which are sour, salt and pungent should be avoided; Any other substance which causes constipation, burning sensation during digestion, which are not easy to digest and which are cold in potency; This group of substances gives rise to aggravation of all the Doshas in persons suffering from ulcers. 39 — 40. Page No. 333 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Hee cHrevieormanaoarel, CATE ESOT Strong penetrating, hot wines, with high percentage of alcohol, dry — non-unctous and sour, quickly cause death of the patient of ulcers. 40’. aeeiter dista a def ciate a cera a pughdseaeed Wea Raraqgatdatctat Har: yoaeret: a: serarey cares a aoe ie The ulcer site should be fanned either with tuft of hairs of animals or with that of Ushira (Vetiver) grass. It should not be beaten, poked, or scratched with nails, it should be protected from injury while doing other activities; The person who engages himself in hearing pleasant stories, meeting with virtuous elderly persons of the twice born castes (Brahmin), he who is hopeful of cure of the disease gets rid of the ulcer quickly. 41-42. qeieraiteet Yat: paragon a Yaad watoenie, eae alate aratecar On the third day, the same treatment such as washing the ulcer etc. are done, as explained earlier; These should not be done on the second day as that will give rise to severe pain, formation of tumors and delayed healing of the ulcer. 43 — 44. Rasa Ba ees Met Geteat sT fader at a Gauichoh aT Tagiereel faada AaeSel feealeareror eorarsra: erereaTfarMegraearra Aaa TOT The wick of cotton threads smeared with paste of drugs and also the paste of drugs should neither be very unctuous (oily) nor very dry; neither flabby nor very thick — hard and should not be improperly placed; Because unctuousness (oily, fatty) increases moistness, dryness causes tears in the muscles, severe pain, lacerations and bleeding. Flabby, hard and improperly placed wick produces friction of the edges of the ulcer. 45 — 46. gor faetertredter feera: raratahhrear When the medicinal wick remaining long inside the ulcer produces putrefaction of the muscles, elevated surface, loss of tissues and accumulation of pus inside, then the ulcer should be cleaned — cleared of its contents quickly. 47. Page No. 334 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan care Ff Ufed eth oreet: BUTT Haetoreansed afaaoaaasy: When an unripe swelling has been cut open by ignorance it should be treated with foods and poultices which bring about ripening but which are not very opposed / harmful to the ulcer. 48. Sadyovrana Chikitsa — treatment of traumatic wounds - Hes: Tema] Here fers ea TAL Adsiicaarel Teelel Sear: Ue Hepat: RergearebscavsHuiieangy Marae HEHSASI ICT IET Traumatic wounds which are recent and wide should be sutured immediately; So also the ulcers which are made by scraping fatty tumors, Pinna of the ears which are thin, ulcers located on the head, eye-sockets, nose, lips, cheeks, ears, arms neck, forehead, scrotum, buttocks, penis, rectum, abdomen etc which are situated on important fleshy and immovable parts should be sutured. 49 — 50. Wounds that should not be sutured immediately - a gq agevrnanaaccAe Tel AL areas: easel MARAT TT ser STL That are on groins, axilla, etc, which are less muscular and movable, ulcers which emit air (gas), which have foreign body inside, which are produced by alkalies (kshara), poisons and fire should not be sutured. 51. dieteaheeepargenratcts J Veter Are fatearsd ferdea taferagrt aetaee a ad tad Taka WAT deat: Peder Qe Ase Teteaed aT aT ag Suturing should be done only after removing loose pieces of bones, dried blood clots, grass, hairs etc; by placing the torn and hanging pieces of muscles in their proper places, keeping the joints of bones and bones fractured in their normal positions and after the stoppage of bleeding; by making use of tendons of animals, threads of cotton, silk, flax etc. or inner fibres of bark of trees; Suturing being done neither very far apart nor very close, holding neither very much of the tissues nor very little. 52 — 53%. Page No. 335 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan aecaica Tava aor aepEagc: Basreratl aa ferehtereorchrnet: MieAeyHicsd yssaIetenie Tad After suturing, having comforted the patient with encouraging words, cold water drink, fanning etc. the ulcer should be covered with cotton swab soaked in a mixture of honey, melted ghee, Anjana — Srotonjana, ash of Ksyauma (flax), Phalini, fruit of Shallaki, Rodhra and Madhuka; then bandaging and other measures done as described previously. 54 — 55. aon far: eiftrdtset a: faradaateeca aq BraTaeert Hetcsetiea FaeT eforaay The edges of the ulcer which are not bleeding should be scraped a little to induce bleeding and sutured when the blood is flowing; for the blood is the cause — agent for healing of the ulcers. 56. Bandhana — bandages:- atte J eMdletel Aes gosta ay a sifeetforetHheeraycr, ala g ofrerereL Sra SOT Corte cH CTT ea TAL, career so Fer: apuprferes el oT PsUcHah waeHpeMie a Bandages suitable to the site of the ulcer / organs of the body should be made use of. Among them, that prepared from sheeps skin, and silk is hot. Bandage from flax is cold, that from silk-cotton, cotton, tendons of animals — aponeuroses, sheaths, thin layers of tendons etc. and bark of trees is both hot and cold; wounds which have more of fat and Kapha, should be covered with thin sheets of copper, iron, zinc, or lead; so also the fractures; In case of fractures bandaging should be done by using leather, bark of trees and splints — hard and flat pieces of bamboo, wood, metal etc. 57 — 58. FAATARTAPR TET AT IST T heater ccleaner, Ueadartrea reac aSMoHUT: wah Asa T USasa Ais Bota facearcady asda alerergaeirary, Tao avtpanigedryad J aieery Acct Agataretyssardera asa: Bea sgt CA STH, Mranedarepa eos Page No. 336 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan weat ToS gat ase, fast yoowtay FPA PAHS facet qaorgeataen RRA aa faaieatt catcags, aratsofagariey aH Seay AM, TAH ala Tr Ged ssa ASHES T , USasahh Medoryy at aa afefase: Fated ast aa seArey Bandages are of the same shapes implied in their very names and are fifteen in number; they are Kosha, Swasthika, Muttoli, China, Dama, Anuvellita, Khatva, Vibandha, Sthagika, Vitana, Utsanga, Gosphana, Yamaka, Sthagika, Mandala and Panchangi; Kosha kind should be used for the joints of fingers, Swastika for the ears, Axilla etc. for breasts and joints; Mittoli for the penis, neck etc.; China for the outer canthus of the eyes; Dama at places of junction of body parts such as groins etc.; Anuvellita for the extremities, Khatva for cheeks, lower jaw and temples; Vibandha for the back and abdomen; Sthagika for the thumb, fingers, tip of the penis, and in hernia in the groins; Vitana for organs which are thick and also for the head; Utsanga for hanging parts; Gosphana for the nose, lips, joints etc; Yamaka for places having two adjacent ulcers; Mandala for parts which are round; Pancangi for parts above the shoulders. An intelligent physician should apply, that type of bandage which is most suitable to the place of the body. 59 - 61. Tight bandage — GRATES RET HAASE TTT MATA ATHA: FSoueasaretey wa AeA a, at TieTy DT rer, atefaeamtaearm aaVesAled TAA MeAT AACA, Fei Ms Taree gta card aft a at Alerofrat sage Reardiceatdett areeary FAY Ac: Waray waar, ta Reread Tar ariracaaratat area eat dead Page No. 337 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Bandage should be tied tight over the thighs, buttocks, axillae, groins, and head; it should be moderate over the extremities, face, ears, chest, back, flanks, neck, abdomen, penis and scrotum; On places which are even neither hard nor flabby it should be tight, it should be very tight if the ulcer is situated on the seats — organs of Vata and Kapha. Moderate tight bandage - it should be moderate over the eyes, joints etc; so also on places which are flabby, on places where the ulcer has been produced by Vata and Kapha it should be moderate, bandage should be removed once in three days during Sita — cold and Vasanta (spring) seasons. Loose bandage — Bandage should be tied moderately tight on hard parts if the ulcer on them are produced by Pitta and Rakta, and on even-parts, it should be loose; on places where loose bandaging is prescribed, it should not be tied at all; during Grisma — summer and Sarat — autumn bandage should be removed in the evening and morning. 62 — 65%. Harel ceraernetararanrehsa: gerdteat a a fasscergrrory POT ae wie ar Ait wet faavtary If the ulcer is not bandaged, it gets contaminated by the bite of mosquitoes, cold breeze etc., the fats and medicines applied to the ulcer do not stay on, the ulcer requires long time to become clean without pus etc. and get healed, and even after healing it will be discoloured the skin over the area does not get back the normal colour of the body. 66 — 67. TET Ptah arse fafowe: wnfect sift ar FSrASTGRA Hae He Atel aT: Se MTA ATEAT waers a tisad segedise: wacaeat favs: Hise aifcres TAT Ages ela aor: wees vet Bandaging helps easy and quick healing of wounds in which the bones are found crushed or fractured, joints are dislocated, which are cut up by the physician, in which tendons and veins are severed, by bandaging there will be no pain during getting up, lying down and such other acts; swelling of the part of the body which are either uneven, hard and very painful or even soft, and painless — all become clean and heal quick. 69. Feronracwataea Tease weorgsatsd wens wad a srivineontead: sAecce tera art: alcraden: aftftepatoiernarast: Ulcers which are persisting long, which have very little of muscular tissue, which do not heal to dryness absence of moisture should be applied with medicines which are wrapped in leaves of trees, appropriate to the Doshas involved and the seasons; the leaves should not be ripened ones Page No. 338 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan but should be young — tender ones, not having holes, good in all respects, washed well and not rough, should belong to trees which have milky sap, Bhurja, Arjuna or Kadamba. 70 — 71. Bandaging contra indication — Sonatas MenmayAteny attardiegetat amaren frsfeda: aetetea f ARTaT TET T erect ereraron: Beserer: etpracenfaaeer: Bandaging should not be done for ulcers which are of leprosy or burns by fire, of diabetes mellitus, of rat bite, burnt by alkalies, caused by poison, which have putrefaction of the muscles, severe ulcerations of the rectum, which are degenerating with loss of tissues which have pain and burning sensation, which retain the swelling over long period and which spread to other parts. 72 -7B. SRT aOY aeaey Aierear fererrcpattey a seried: Hafedt Corenpreayaaey Beale Waster AT AeeTGRTT Ardea aor alleatcda: aealaienal oa: Ah: aes a: Weores ARTA aT aT Trey fers Flies deposit worms — bacteria etc. inside the ulcers which are not protected by bandaging, they — bacteria by devouring the tissues produce pain, swelling and bleeding; for washing and filling of such septic ulcers the drugs of Surasadigana — vide chapter 15 should be Rajadana prepared with cows urine should be applied, bathing the ulcer with solution of alkalies is beneficial or scarification of the muscle tissues, by these measures the worms — bacteria etc. should be removed out quick. 74 — 76. a det CARAT sect: BaleTER aL, BT HeVATCATIRNT aya fapect Aa: Hasty healing of the ulcer which has residue of the Doshas inside, should not be attempted; for it will flare up greatly even with slight improper regimen. 77. wesrasivieararacraraael Faas as mer st aie macredrarsard HMEROMGACH 3 ARAL YE AeA aT Fahey: Page No. 339 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Even after the ulcer has healed the patient should avoid indigestion, physical activities, copulation etc; great rejoicing, anger, fear etc. till he attains his full strength, he should lead a disciplined life for at least six or seven months. 78 — 79. SICUATAT TARA AY area atsrfesonepant cederet: veratatacdarctare, reac ary Such other conditions which manifest should be managed with methods appropriate to the strength of the Doshas etc., in the light of the details furnished on the Uttara Tantra — the last section of this treatise (vide chapter 25 — 27) 80. Thus ends the chapter named Shastrakarma Vidhi — 29" of Sutrasthana of Astangahridayam. Page No. 340 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Chapter 30 Kshar-AgniKarma Vidhi anfernat fate Kshara is an effective Ayurvedic medicine for healing wound. Agnikarma is also used as a surgical instrument in Ayurveda. This is the 30" chapter of Ashtanga Hridaya Sutrasthana, called Kshara Agnikarma Vidhi Adhyaya. Kshara Sresthata — advantages of alkaline cautery:- FUTTIRREy, det TAfeAaIey a aft Prog Wey aed wey HT Youd Of all the sharp instruments and accessory instruments, Kshara (caustic alkali) is the best. It performs many functions such as incising, excising etc; It can be used even in inaccessible places. Success can be obtained by its use even in diseases which are very difficult to cure and also because it can be used even in the form ofa drink. 1 — 2. Paneeya Kshara indication — H Ua areifisererarearsirarernney In a drinkable form it is used in Arsha — haemorrhoids, Agnisada — dyspepsia, Ashma — renal calculus, Gulma — Tumors of the abdomen Udara — ascites, enlargement of the abdomen Garavisha — chronic poisoning etc. Pratisarana Kshara Yogya - Usa: MeTAIRaTa EMT: Hoaheay HARTGE Me AGSCAMATOMT, In the form direct application, Kshara can be used in Mashaka — moles — warts, Shvitra — leucoderma, Bahya Arsha — external piles, Page No. 341 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kushta — skin diseases Supti — anesthetic patches, Bhagandara — rectal fistula, Arbuda — cancerous growth, Granthi — tumour, fibroid Dushta Nadi vrana — foul and sinus ulcers etc. Kshara Nisedha — contra indication:- at ert aft ateces: cc tact ae tact say fear eaENG qesarery seat faTAY poeeret eaaeit adaraet stenttioagudisiagearmorntery soitisest eit ge cactateury PROTEAAR TA A eetaToLATTY at HOTA GIAgaaetaeayt aceRred semteT eftrastoore feet Neither externally, nor internally, Kshara should be used in Aggravation of Pitta and Rakta and diminished Vata; Jvara — fever Atisara — diarrhoea, dysentery Hrut Murdha Roga — diseases of the heart and head, Pandu — anemia Aruchi — anorexia, Timira — blindness; Kruta samshuddha — in those who have been administered Panchakarma therapies (recently), Sarvagatra shvayathu — who have swelling of the entire body, Bheeru — who are fearful, coward, the pregnant, the menstruating woman, woman who has difficult menstrual flow, or woman who has displacement of either vagina or uterus; Ajirne Anne — when the food remains undigested, for infants and old persons, on places of the body such as the arteries, joints, vulnerable spots, cartilages, veins, tendons/nerves, sutures, throat, umbilicus and places which are poor of muscles, the testes, penis, orifices, passages, interior of the nails; In diseases of the eyes except those of the eyelids; during cold, rainy and hot seasons and on days when the sun in not seen. 4 — 7. Page No. 342 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Kshara Nirmana — preparation of caustic alkali:- PAPA HAG AMAA EL HAHUTAST GAT TAME ATT, FHAGAT HY fel hole TATA LAA ATL PPASUAATTAA ea Ae Moet eae Tae BUS: UH ETAL SRTAMLIAAAT eH Aol TACT T fetaret freee Yee afer Pete yiece anal Semester a ata Aare Hactesearssat Taare Fer FSPACRATG Weta Tea: MAAGUANT ASAT AA T at WMaceatedesedenitadetal T AA Wea aANferaeg TIectea EAT Tera TAEARAEAT: PUTER: Utd: ao rgueaarearastet ea wiseravtieager: anialepsdtiend faatea fascar deta wear fafaferta, MART Ape AA AAP Hp ATA PCG GCE GIL EIC CUT a ORa: Get aet creat qaqa wasted aalfcrsoaqaietsaaa: Haag det effet zarrenraatert Sareay 3rat AeA: at Moist roots, branches and other parts of trees such as Kalamushkaka, Shamyaka, Kadali (Banana), Paribhadraka, Ashvakarna, Mahavriksha, Palasha, Asphota, Vrikshaka, Indravriksha, Arka, Putika, Naktamala, Ashvamaraka, Kakajangha, Apamarga, Agnimantha, Agni or Tilvaka — are cut into small pieces and placed on clean stone slabs, separately, in heaps; Pieces of the four kinds of Koshataki plants, the spikes and reeds of Yava (barley) plants are also similarly heaped. Into the heap of Kalamushkaka, pieces of lime stone are put in. All the heaps are set on fire by making use of dried chaff of Tila plant (Sesame plant). After the heaps have been well burnt and fire has disappeared, one Drona (12,288 g) of ash of lime stone together with ash of Kalamushkaka and one and a quarter Drona (3072 g) of ash of others are taken, mixed together, dissolved well in half Bhara (48000 g) of water and cows urine separately, and filtered through a thick cloth till a slimy, reddish, clear and penetrating alkaline Page No. 343 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan material is obtained. It is then transferred into an iron cauldron and cooked, stirring it constantly with a ladle; To this is added one Kudava (192 g) of ash of limestone, shells of mother of pearls, Kshirapaka (Khatika or clay), spiral of conch shell — each made red hot over a pan, fine powder of excreta of cock, peacock, falcon, heron and pigeon, bile of quadrupeds and birds, Ala ( haritala-Orpiment), Manohva (Realgar) and salts, all these are ground into a paste and mixed with the boiling solution, stirring it all the while from all sides. When it begins to emit fumes, bubbles come up and attains a solid consistence like a confection (Avaleha), the cauldron should be taken out of fire. When it gets cool, it is transferred into an iron vessel which is kept concealed inside a heap of Yava (barley) for some days. This is the mode of preparing Madhyama Kshara — alkali of medium potency. 8 — 1914. For preparing Mrudu Kshara (Kshar of Mild Potency) — a g fascar fadeqet fratrarreraedient Ysa wierarreray, aan argatfernrefecataaaitara saa: Fa forarencrHanh esate: creat fase ait, AoA J a: ala: alkali of mild potency, the admixture — ash of shells, powder of excreta, biles etc. should not be made into a paste and added but put in powder form and taken out — filtered and thrown away. For preparing Teekshna Kshara — alkali of strong potency the admixture should be similar to that of previous — alkali of medium potency and also the paste of Langalika, Danti, Chitraka, Ativisha, Vacha, Svarjika, Kanakaksiri, Hingu, sprouts of Putika, Talapatri and Bida salt and alkali prepared as usual and used after a lapse of seven days. 20 — 21%. Trividha Kshara Yojana — indications of three kinds of alkali:- evil siferorecterAatstrageniey Aeasatdd AAT: Acc eaeAg Teekshna Kshara — Alkali of strong potency should be used in diseases arising from Vata, Kapha, Medas — fat, Arbuda — cancerous growth and such others which are very difficult to cure, Madhyama Kshara — alkali of medium potency is useful in those diseases when they are of moderate strength, not very difficult to cure. Mrudu Kshara — Mild alkali is used In diseases arising from Pitta and Asra — Rakta and heamorrhoids, Page No. 344 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan When the alkali loses its water content some quantity of alkali solution should be added to strengthen it. 22 — 23. Ksharaguna — properties and actions of alkali:- aifectext aq: erate: fofewet: effet: fa: Rat qufeateat a fasaedt at a sifted ey AIRY Serer: MEATS Hache aSiers RHQMAA sales ws AIA HALL NTH TA Foret: HH Hea AoA: TATAATMFAAT Na ati teekshna — Neither too strong na ati mrudu — nor too mild, Shlakshna — smooth, Picchila — slimy, Sheeghraga — quick in spreading Sita — white in colour, Shikhari — remaining like a mountain peak at the site of application, Sukha nirvapya — easily removable, Na vishyandi — producing neither too much of exudation / moistness Na ati ruk —does not cause much pain These are the ten ideal qualities of the caustic alkali. It does all the functions of the sharp surgical instrument and also the fire. By actions such as sucking quickly, healing effect over the body, spreading everywhere, it pulls out all the Doshas (vitiating materials) by their root; After such actions when the diseases disappears, Kshara also subsides on its own accord. 24 — 26. Kshara Prayoga — procedure of Alkaline cauterization :- anand ae feet fared ufacd sear AX Mela Fecal ollMIGacear Ararat The disease treatable by alkali should either be cut, scraped / made to exude fluid first. Then the alkali taken in an iron rod, is placed on the spot, the other parts surrounding of the body kept covered and protected by cotton swabs and a time period of one hundred Matra awaited. 27. wae: Target Beet Test Hata acy acti feaise een sreorem povrsrra fafa TMG ATT AAR TAHA Page No. 345 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Arar feet: osm aqaaerhest Horst In haemorrhoids, if the tip of the pile mass is found concealed, it should be manipulated by the hand in such way as to place the alkali on them, inside the anal canal. In diseases of the eyelids, the lids are to be everted, the black area — cornea kept covered with cotton swab as protection and then alkali applied as thin as of a lotus petal to the interior of the lids. In cancer of the nose, the patient is made to sit facing the sun, the tip of the nose is raised up and alkali applied into the nostril and a time of fifty Matra Kala awaited; In case of piles, polyp of the ears also it shall be similar. 28 — 30. a Waste wRSMaTeT T Fert Parad acess: ferdticdd: aot: Target: weet sada asa atsaht reqs a aie a feaaercarceny aeet at ofrecer Meares aeaseay:a fate edad: faatmen: SAYA Yara TORTI: Afterwards the prescribed time the alkali is wiped off with a cotton swab etc. and perceiving that the site has been properly burnt by the alkali, a mixture of ghee and honey should be applied, made cool by pouring milk, whey or sour gruel, and then applying a paste of drugs of sweet taste and cold potency. The patient should consume foods which produce more secretions in the tissue cells in order to moisten the site of burn. If the site of the burn does not get torn from an ulcer because of being deep rooted, then a paste of seed of Dhanyamala-(sour gruel), Yashti (licorice) and tila (sesame) should be applied; fathom: TAYR Galea TORTI: | Paste of tila (sesame), and Madhuka mixed with ghee heals the ulcer. 31-33 urdarsad eat Urasqrer faces 3y maTAeHesaetgarerey t Were Symptoms of good burning due to Kshara — Attaining black color, similar to the ripe fruit of Jambu (Jamun fruit), depression of the site- are the feature of a samyag dagdha. The opposite of it, that is appearance of Tamravarna — coppery red color, pricking pain, itching etc. are the features of Durdagdha improper- inadequate burning, such an area should be burnt again. 34 Page No. 346 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Atidagdha- over-burning afdese waned Aeoteecaed: qectrerct acqah Tees erceneyay ARR Aah pS aga: aaed fava deged starieey aT Atidagdha- over-burning produces bleeding, fainting, burning sensation, fever etc. Over-burning of the Anus- rectum produces obstruction for passing of feces and urine or their excess elimination, loss of muscular and sexual power (impotency) and death. In case of the nose, there will be severe burning sensation, contraction of the nasal bridge and loss of sense of smell; similarly so in case of ears etc other sense organs. 35-37 fagtsraa Sat srectefat ey yet feron: aaftcaet aser ada fer Par sre & era: caer anedarated: WAY, FAG EATS F eter aa In such conditions, burning the part with sour fluids, applications of paste of honey, ghee and Tila (sesame), activities- foods other comforts which mitigate Vata and Pitta and all others which produce cold, should be adopted. As sour is cold to touch, combining with the Alkali it quickly attains the properties of sweet taste, hence the burn caused by Alkali should be washed with sour substances quickly. 38-39. fauifserereaeetyccyded: ART qaqerHtaryrd: a ear Tey FA Werfeteraarearey ARTey Kshara administered by the physician of poor intellect is like death caused by poison, fire, sharp weapon, or thunderbolt; Whereas done properly by an intelligent physician it cures even dreaded diseases quickly. Agni karma- thermal cautery- branding:- sitet: aTaRT SOSA ETM AMAA ETAT FymeMaesa at Tee Waele Yo Fire- thermal cautery is better than even the Kshara, for the diseases that are treated by Agnikarma do not recur and it can be used even in diseases which have not been successful treated by Drugs, Kshara or Shastrakarma (surgery). 40 Page No. 347 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Agnikarma Yojana- indications and contraindications for thermal cautery :- cate are Reeeeeaery a asad SE ECUIG GCI GOL ICIGIICAS T 3 TarareY aiclatter creamer Tse: It is used on the skin, muscle, vein, tendon, joints and bones. In diseases like black moles, weakness of body parts, headache, Adhimantha- a disease of the eye, warts, cysts etc. burning of the skin should be done either with a lighted wick, tooth of a cow, rock crystal, arrow head or others — such as Pippali, excreta of goat, iron- rod, piece of bangles. 41 seiferreetaeUeTslescaoMey, Aaa Atkelgatradlospsrte ier: Haemorrhoids, rectal fistula, tumors, sinus ulcers and bad- septic, longstanding, foul ulcers etc. should be treated by burning of the muscles with- hot honey, fats, Jambavostha- an iron instrument with a spoon shaped tip, jaggery- treacle etc. 42 RowcacHieay rade eaaRaT CHT fauigareecta Slishtavartma-exudative disease of the eyelids, bleeding, blue mole, improper cutting- surgical wound etc. burning of the veins should be done by — using the same materials enumerated in the previous verse. 43 Contra indication for Agni karma — a aecananhtaey Hea UAH Petcare] LATTA TL Burning should not be done for those who are not suitable for Kshara karma, wounds which have foreign body or accumulation of blood inside, persons who have perforation of abdominal viscera and those who are suffering from severe wounds. 44 Fess yaAtard Rarsereiict: weer The site which has been burnt properly — by fire should be given a coating of ghee and honey and an application of paste of drugs which are unctuous and cold in potency. (snigdha, sheeta) Page No. 348 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Daha laksana- features of proper and improper burning:- aea forget Rud teed weqaeraaieday vs) Thdleraiaet Be aAfeaaty | The signs of samyak dagdha- proper burning are stoppage of bleeding, emergence of crackling sound accompanied with lymph, the area having color resembling a ripe Tala fruit or pigeon dark grey. The wound healing easily and not much of pain .45 The signs of inadequate burning and excess burning The signs of inadequate burning and excess burning are similar to those of improper burning. Burning is of four kinds, together with Tuccha Dagdha- bad/ mean/ undesirable/ inadequate burning. Tee arr sare — The signs of tuccha dagdha He TET at | cap faavt sea seat a T EHlea Aa: lvl wentecediarst gare sifcated: fautorerequeeoarvrnesaycaa: The signs of tuecha dagdha are discoloration of the skin, severe burning sensation, Signs of atidagdha- over burning are Mamsalambana — dropping down of the muscles, sankocha — constriction, Daha — burning sensation Dhupana — feeling of hot fumes coming out, vedana — pain Siradi nasha — destruction of veins etc, Trut — excessive thirst Murcha — fainting, loss of consciousness Gambhira Vrana —worsening of the wound and Mrutyu — death. 46-48 Page No. 349 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Feoraisar Tce aeTSoT a aya Feat HS aaa Heat facet Aecat Fat: A Tuccha Dagdha- bad/ inadequate burning- should be burnt once again and paste of drugs which are hot in potency, should be used; when the blood is coagulated there is severe pain and when it is dissolved pain is mild. 49 gerd eraser a assererel aah fear In case of Durdagdha- improper burning clod and hot treatment should be used, the hot one first and the cold one next. 50 Braves caahitccraraeaeta hte: fartcasuadaed cata eatcwa4 In case of Samyagdadha- proper burning, a paste of Tavaksiri, Plaksha, Chandana (Sandalwood), Gairika (Red ochre) and Amrita (Tinospora) mixed with ghee should be applied on the area of burn and then therapies indicated for an abscess of Pitta origin should be adopted. 51 aitese got pated Pcafeatad | SAeaTT AM Val AT I Alea Ils2l In case of Atidagdha- over burning all the therapeutic measures prescribed for Visarpa of Pitta origin should be done quickly. In case of burning by fats- hot oil, ghee etc, measures which are very dry- cause severe dryness should be adopted. 52 greaeRTsayay Wea: WAU wae Bye AeAlcdel FTaIRAL The knife, Alkali and fire are chief weapons of the lord of death; hence the physician should administer them with great care. Thus will be concluded, this section of Astanga Hrudaya which is full of secrets, for in it are codified all the chief doctrines which are described in detail everywhere — in the entire treatment. 53 Thus ends the chapter named Ksharagni Karma Vidhi- the thirtieth in Suthrasthana of Astangahrdaya Samhita. Page No. 350 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan Some Points to Note About Ayurveda: e = Ayurveda is the most ancient healing science, most ancient human effort for health and well-being ever recorded. It is sister science of Yoga. It is still a living and influencing science of prevention, treatment, and health promotion. e = Ayurveda has its own peculiarity. It has its own philosophy. All of which may not always exactly fit with other medical sciences. e = Ayurveda believes in cause-effect phenomenon. The therapies are broadly classified into — Yukti vyapasraya (use of rational therapies), Sattvavajaya (use of psychological therapies), and Daivyavyapasraya (use of Divine methods like faith healing). ° Today medical science has extensively studied many things, but still these ideas of Ayurveda help to a large extent. Both ancient and modern ideas should be encouraged to be studied and practiced in medical field for overall welfare of all. e Practitioners and Institutions or organizations who deal with Ayurveda can have specific guidelines based on such classical texts and/or new studies or experiences. About Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan e = Astanga = 8 organs (eight branches of cla: e = Hridaya = Heart (gist) e = Astanga Hridayam was written by Vagbhat in about i century in Indian subcontinent. It is about health care. In Ayurveda there are eight (Astanga) classical specialties. The predominant two schools in Ayurveda are Charak (Medicine) and Sushruta / Dhanwantari (Surgery). This book is the summary of all the branches including Charak and Sushruta. And the Sutra-sthan, the first section, is the summary of the whole book. Hence, it can be said that this collection is the summary of whole of the classical Ayurveda. e = Ashtanga Hridayam is one of the important ancient Ayurvedic text books. It is one of the basic text books that are included in BAMS curriculum. . This is one of the books that can make you feel you've got the book that you were looking for, if you are interested in Ayurveda, Yoga, or traditional and ancient medicine. ° This can be also an ample help to anyone who wishes to know ideas of people of the past, for appreciation, for critical reviews, research etc. (You may belong to general people, or doctor, or nurse, or anyone directly or indirectly involved in health care.) e It was written in the time of influence of Buddhism, the author has shown respect to Hindu and Buddhist ideals. ° These ideas are similar to the ideas in different parts of the world in ancient times; these ideas represent a kind of summary of ancient human knowledge from all over the world. e = Most of these ideas are very much useful even today. e Some of the ideas may sound uncomfortable or harmful to present day ideas. e Some ideas are not found in practice these days, while some ideas are found practiced same as mentioned in the text, some are practiced with some modifications. e = In some cases it is seen that one idea of an Ayurveda scholar may vary from that of another. Such issues used to be resolved by sambhasa or logical discussions. ical Ayurveda) Page No. 351 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan
Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan While reading this collection, Keep in the mind that: The number/s in the front or last of each paragraph indicates verse number. Reading this collection may be easier to those who already have got basic ideas of Ayurveda, or to those who want to know something of Ayurveda or ancient healing ideas. e Some of the plants or animals explained in this ancient book may not be exactly translated in this translation, may be due to lack of exactly same species. e Some of the terms explained in the ancient book may not have exact substitute in English. e — Some sorts of faults in translation can be traced, such as the translator may translate ‘dravy' to be ‘herb’, but it can sometimes denote other substances to which either may be herb or metal or liquid or grain, that either may be used as medicine or as supplement or as food or as other sort of substance in the view of therapy. e The word Vasti may also be written as Basti, Svedana as Swedana etc, Standard way of transliterating Sanskrit verses has not been strictly followed.(We shall try to do so in coming days) e = Almost all the translation has been included, excepts if any mistakenly unlisted lines exist; but not all the original slokas in 'devnagari' are listed. e = Most of the botanical/Latin/scientific names of species have not been italicized. (May be tried in next correction) e = Ausual mistake during translation can be like use of general male tone like using ‘he’ to denote a person. It can be boring to a feminist. If s/he wants to make the reading comfortable s/he can replace those terms by proper feminist or neutral pronoun, in most of the times as long as the meaning does not get distorted. Some of the ideas may just be focused from the point of view of males, it should not be bothered, but there are some separate sections in Ayurveda which focuses on Female and child health called Kaumarbhrittya. (In ancient Ayurveda the word Purusha denotes anyone (male or female) who is the subject under consideration. However, Purusha in Nepali or Hindi general term denotes to male.) . While using ideas in the book, it is good to take help from the Ayurveda scholar who has good level of knowledge and experience- so that we can prevent ourselves from wrong doing. . While compiling this book, immense help from following webs and blogs were taken. We are thankful to them. o = JV Hebber's Website http://www. learningayurveda.com/category/ashtanga- hrudaya/ o Tania Anvar's Blog http://ahsutrasthana. blogspot.com e Better authentic books are available in book stores or in internet. e This is just to share ideas, not to replace anything including professional advises or therapies. e = If there is anything you could do to help us first would be sending your feedback/comment. It needs some correction, which will be possible by your guidance. e — This is just an attempt to share knowledge. There can be some flaws which will be corrected in days to come, but there are a lot of interesting ideas in a simple English in this collection. Live happily. Keep smiling. Be positive. Try your best. Keep loving yourself and others. Page No. 352 Astanga Hridaya Sutrasthan