a : _ ° THE MOHANDAS INDOLOGICAL SERIES 3 “RE Parameswarappa’s Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijhana (According to the Syllabus of Central Council of Indian Medicine, New Delhi) _ Volume 1 Vikrti-Vijfiana By Dr. P.S. Byadgi CHAUKHAMBHA PUBLICATIONS New Delhi
Publisher: © CHAUKHAMBHA PUBLICATIONS 4262/3, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj New Delhi-110002 (India) Telephone : 23259050 Telefax : 011-23268639 E-mail : cpub@vsni.net ISBN : 978-81-89798-03-1 . All Rights Reserved Edition : Reprint, 2013 Price: = 350/- | . Head Office : CHAUKHAMBHA SANSKRIT SANSTHAN Publishers and Distributors of Oriental Cultural Literature Post Box No. 1139 K. 37/116, Gopal Mandir Lane, Golghar (Near Maidagin) Varanasi-221001 (India) Telephone : 2333445, Telefax : 0542-2335930 E-mail : cssvns @sify.com Branch : CHAUKHAMBHA SANSKRIT SANSTHAN 692/93, Raviwar Peth, Kapadganj Near D.S. House, Pune - 411002. (India) Telephone : 020-24471283, Mobile No. 09970193955 E-mail : hn.shah @rediffmail.com
Parameswarappa’s Ayurvediya Vikrti-Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana Volume I Vikrti-Vijiana \
Sri Maddujjayani Saddharma Simasanadisa Sri Taralabalu Jagadguru Lingaikya Sri 1108 Sri Sri Sri Sivakumara Sivacarya Maha Svamiji Sirigere - 577 541. Citradurga (Dist.)
FOREWORD T have gone through the Prepress script of the book ‘‘Parameswarappa *s Ayurvediya ‘Vikrti Vijhana & Roga Vijfidna’’. The book presents the classic description of the impor- tant aspects of the subject spread over 20 dif- ferent chapters dealing with Dosa, Dogavaha Srotas, Dhatu, Mala, Agni, Ama, Srotas, Kriyakala, Vyadhi, Upadrava, Janapada- dhvamsa, Vyadhiksamatva and Roga-Rogi Pariksa. The author has Provided related textual references in the running body of the book with abridged English version. As such the book carries a rich reference manual on Ayurvedtya Vikrti Vijidna & Roga Vijndna. Primafacie, it is an excellent addition to the contemporary Ayurvedic literature for English readers, Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana are important clinical subjects in Ayurvedic education. The subject has re- mained static for centuries for want of practical training. Most of the Ayurvedic institutions teach Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijnadna & Roga Vijfiana only in theoretical classrooms and hardly any practical training is given. The practicals given to graduate stu- dents in most Ayurvedic colleges are in the form of Modern Pathology, laboratory medicine and clinical method. Hardly any attempt is made to design Practical experiments on real Ayurvedic diagnostics in Laboratory settings and on bedsides. Such defective training in Ayurvedic colleges has lead to a trend of Modern diagnosis and Ayurvedic treatment among the _ Ayurvedic practitioners. This has proved dangerous to the very existence of Ayurvedic Medicine as a full science. Ayurveda seems to be gradually getting reduced to mere therapeutics. This tendency has also encouraged illegitimate use of Ayurvedic therapy by Allopathic doctors and use of modern drugs by Ayurvedic practitioners in their general practice leading to ethi- cal and professional crisis. The only solution to the problem is
10 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana to improve the quality of teaching and practical training of Ayurvedic doctors in Ayurvedic diagnostics. For this, there is a need of producing good literature on the subject with appre- ciable rationality and practical bias. Further, there is a need of designing laboratory and beside clinical experiments on im- portant aspects of Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijana & Roga Vijnana which may equip our graduate students to make Ayurvedic di- agnosis and to acquire true knowledge of the basics of Ayurvedic pathology and diagnostics. The Parameswappa’s book may be of help in the initial aspects of this most needed exercise. ' Ayurveda is a holistic science of life and health. It is based on the doctrine of Loka-Purusa SGmya and Svabhavoparama vada. It adopts unique holistic diagnostics hallmarked with evaluation of the very nature of the host-factor of the disease- state besides the quantum of remainder health and genomic fea- “tures of the victim. The disease is the product of unwholesome interaction of man with his environment mediated through an altered sequence of events in tridosika rhythm, dosa-dhatus (dusya) combustion, biofire (agni) deficits and Joss of the in- tegrity of internal transport system-of the body, the srotdamsi. The Ayurvedic diagnostics is of two-fold comprising of Rogi-Pariksé and Roga-Pariksa separately. Rogi-Pariksa is ex- amination of the patient as a being, irrespective of his or her disease. This part of clinical examination aims.to determine the genomic typology of the patient as well as the state of physi- ological functions, immune status and state of the remainder health. Usually, Caraka’s Dagavidha Pariksa—Prakyti, Vikrti, Sattva, Sdra, Sarhanana, Satmya, Pramana, Ahéra Sakti, Vyayama Sakti and Vaya—is ubed for clinical assessment of this component of Rogi Partksa. Such an evaluation of the pa- tient permits tremendous information about the victim patient, which may prove to be of great help in planning the manage- ment of a patient facilitating the healing process. Roga Pariksa, i.e. examination of the disease may be car- ried out by general examination of the patient utilizing the Foreword , 11 Astavidha Pariksa—Nadi-M utra-Mala—Jihva—-Sabda—Sparga— Drigakrti. This should be followed by detailed systemic exami- nation of trayodasa srotas. All this greatly helps the clinician to gather adequate information about the nature of pathology and its location in the body. Such an examination is essential for making a clinical diagnosis of a disease and for Jaunching disease-specific treatinent. : The Ayurvedic Approach as depicted above is unique in the sense that it extends a message of a real patient-oriented holistic diagnostics, where the patient as a being and his re- mainder-health are the central focus. Ayurveda advocates to differentiate and to separate the ‘patient’ from the ‘disease’ The patient’s original genomic nature and his remainder health form the principal milieu, that is responsible for the healing process. : if a physician succeeds to acquire such a holistic informa- tion about the personality of the patient and the quantum of his remainder-health he can manage the patient to a great extent even if he has not identified the disease entity by name. As a matter of fact neither it is possible nor is necessary to give spe- cific name to every disease state. What all is needed, is to know the nature of the Pathology and the nature of the patient. 4. fa adfrenerati araatsfer gat feat: 11 . . C.Su 18/44 Ayurveda considers unwholesome interaction of man with his environment through ayoga-atiyoga-mithya yoga of kala- buddhi-indriyartha, as the main cause of a disease. Such events essentially are qualitativé aberrations of envi- ronmental physiology of an organism comparable to stress © physiology with potential to precipitate informational pathol- ogy, le. stress disorder. Kala, buddhi and indriyartha signify bio-informational signals targeting the organism, which if over- ride a limit, lead to stress disease.
12 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana.& Roga Vijfiana A disease is not an instantaneous outcome of the cause- host interaction. The disease evolves gradually and sequentially. " Suéruta describes six distinct phases of evolution of a disease caled satkriya kala wherein the dosas undergo a sequential dysrhythmia. The six stages are. 1. Sancaya or accumulation of dosds, 2. Prakopa or vitiation of dosas, 3. Prasara or spread, 4. SthanasamSraya or localisation, 5. Vyakti or maniféstation and 6. Bheda or disruption i.e. chronicity and complications. The fourth kriyakdla or localisation of dosads is considered the most critical stage when the vitiated dosds while spreading tend to localize and stagnate at certain specific locations in the body which might be pre-exposed due to pre-existing defect or or- gan-tissue weakness, i.e. kha-vaigunya, primarily genetic or hereditary defect and secondarily acquired weakness due to a past disease. wae wd yatd wv wat correo | cafe Sd a at af dart a adele 1) S.Su 21/36 These six stages of pathogenesis are collectively termed as kriyakala, i.e. the opportune time for therapeutic interven- tion. If the disease process is detected in one of the earlier phases, i.e. before sthanasaméraya, the disease process can be reversed by appropriate management beyond which the pro- cess becomes irreversible. Thus the knowledge of kriyakdla and ability of the physician to clinch the diagnosis early is of .paramount importance. Early diagnosis and early intervention is the sole message of the concept of kriyakala. An Ayurvedic physician has to acquire clinical acumen to make such a pre- clinical diagnosis for greater success as a therapist. For such an acumen the physician has to have a sense of close observation besides perfect doctor-patient rapport. Caraka rightly empha- sizes that unless the physician succeeds to enter into the very innermost of his patient’s personage with the help of his knowl- edge and wisdom he cannot successfully treat patients. Foreword 13 wa gha wétta at afer aati area + a tifasfacafa 1 C.Vi 4/19 The Author of this book Dr. Parameswarappa S. Byadgi is a scholar and a capable teacher of Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfana & Roga Vijfiana. He is known to me for several years. I appreci- ate his understanding of the subject and the painstaking efforts to compile this important branch of Ayurveda. I congratulate the author for this brilliant scholarly work and wish that many more such useful books may come out from his versatile pen. Le 1 41mg Jan. 26, 2007 Prof. Ram Harsh Singh 6, Ganga Bagh, Lanka, Visiting Professor, WDU, Varanasi-221 005 Republic of Korea, Formerly Professor-Head, Kayachikitsa and DEAN Faculty of Ayurved, Benaras Hindu University, Vice-Chancellor, Rajasthan Ayurved University, Jodhpur /
FOREWORD I am very much glad to write foreword to the book entitled ‘‘Parameswarappa’s ff Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijnana’’ | written by Dr. Parameswarappa. S. Byadgi, Lecturer, Department Of Vikriti Vigyan, Fac- ulty of Ayurveda, Dhanwantari Bhawan, In- stitute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005 Ayurvedic System of medicine deals with traditional approach towards diagnosis and management. This book describes vital tools which are essential components to understand and diagnose the disease accurately by Ayurvedic parameters. It comprises of subject which is essential to ac- ‘quire complete knowledge on Ayurvedic diagnostics. Vikrti Vijnana & Roga Vijfidna is one of the clinica] branches of Ayurveda deals with clinical’: methods and laboratory diagno- sis. Book has been written as per CCIM syllabus. It is useful for undergraduate, post graduate and Ph.D scholars who are pur- suing their studies in Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfidna. _ This is useful to students, teachers, researchers, practitio- ners and medical officers of Ayurveda. Definitely this book is.a unique contribution towards Ayurvedic diagnosis and helps in learning and better understanding of the subject. I appreciate the work of Dr. P. S. Byadgi for his exceflent work to publish this book, which is a useful addition to the understanding of Ayurvedic diagnostics. 1 wish him the bright future and expect more such useful books from his talented brain for the benefit of Ayurvedic fra- -ternity i wreck Prof. Manjari Dwivedi Dean, Faculty of Ayurveda IMS, BHU, Varanasi Date : 27.03.07 Place : BHU — FOREWORD I have been privileged to read “‘Parameswarappa’s Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijnana & Roga Vijnana’’, book written by my student Dr. P.S. Byadgi Lecturer, Depart- ment of Vikriti Vigyan, IMS, BHU, Varanasi. I found this a fascinating, vast provocative, deeply questioning book in relation to Ayurvedic diagnostics, which I think attracts’ students, teachers, researchers, medical of- ficers and practitioners of Ayurveda. This book is written in 20 various chapters deals with the subjects ranging from under- standing of the disease to diagnosis of diseases. Vikrti Vijnana & Roga Vijitana’’ is one of the basic clinical subject which deals with clinical methods and Jaboratory diagnosis. This book fulfills both criteria. Chapters are designed in such a way that it helps to acquire the basic fundamentals of diagnostics and di- agnostic tools. Author covers the syllabus of Vikrti Vijiana as per CCIM syllabus, which is useful for both undergraduate and postgraduate students of Vikyti Vijfiana & Roga Vijnana. I be-- lieve that this book will be a valuable source. of information for the diagnosis and understanding of disease mechanism. Author has tried his level best to systematise the subject in a systematic manner to understand the concept of disease and its technique to diagnose disease. I know Dr. P.S. Byadgi since many years and appreciate his knowledge on Vikrti Vijhana & Roga Vijndna. Work of Dr. P.S. Byadgi is very much appreciable in this re- gard and I congratulate him and expect more such books from: his gifted hand. - Prof. B.N. Upadhyay Department of Kayacikitsa IMS, BHU, Varanasi ia Date : 23.03.07 Place : BHU
PREAMBLE This book addresses the theory and prac- tical aspects of how to diagnose the disease by using various diagnostic aids along with it also explains about understanding of the diseases in toto. In my opinion, that people don’t perceive a problem in any tangible, applicable form until they appreciate that a ; solution exists and then they begin to develop “interest and_understand the problem in terms of the solution. My prediction is based on observations that the Ayurvedic diagnostics is becoming less applicable due to advancement in scientific inventions in relation to diagnostics; still Ayurveda finds a place in clinical diagnostics. My intention is to illumi- nate a bright future about Ayurvedic practice and motivate Ayurvedic physicians to diagnose disease based on Ayurvedic principles. Despite advances in technological medicine, the his- tory taking and physical examination still provide the correct final diagnosis in the majority of cases and remain the corner- stone of clinical medicine and it is the biggest strength of Vikrti Vijnana and Roga Vijnana. Medical students spend a lot of time to learn these techniques. Clinical methods are taught in indoor patient department to teach the long case complete history and physical examination, despite its inefficiency and errors. Ayurverdic Acdryaés say that diagnostic accuracy depends on both mastery of knowledge and thorough practical training. So that students will acquire complete Ayurvedic knowledge to solve problem “nore expertly for the diagnosis of diseases. Core skills of communication, clinical examination, objective assessment, and planning relevant investigations and management are the major points discussed under Vikrti Vijniana and Roga Vijiana. Diagnosis involves gathering clinical information and then refining the probability of a particular diagnosis after acquiring Preamble 17 each piece of evidence. Such evidence can help medical teach- ing focus on“diagnostic maneuvers with proven utility, discard- ing time honored but diagnostically unhelpful maneuvers. While teaching clinical methods to the students I noted their difficulty in learning Ayurvedic clinical methods and felt that many texts of clinical skills used by students do not assist them, and indeed often add to their confusion. I attempted to determine whether this impression was correct, by examining basic clinical textbooks which are available in Ayurvedic fra- ternity. Discussion about the diagnostic process and clinical decision making, general interpretation of the accuracy and re- liability of symptoms and signs, examination findings, infor- mation on disease frequency discussed in detail in various chap- ters. Content of texts was weighted towards clinical methods and laboratory diagnosis to analyse perfectness in Ayurvedic diagnosis. Several texts included Vikrti Vijf@na and Roga Vijfiana only partially, straying beyond the clinical skills fo- cus, yet without properly integrating the results of tests into the process of diagnosis. Learning clinical skills is central to the medical course, that’s why I strongly recommend this book for students to learn Ayurvedic diagnostics. Most of the books failed to integrate lessons from medical education research and avail- able evidence about the effectiveness of aspects of the physical examination. Time efficient, selective clinical examination, with- out cutting corners that sacrifice diagnostic accuracy, is a com- plex skill that could be taught more directly using the prin- ciples of clinical reasoning and problem solving. It may be un- realistic to expect a single book to fulfill all of these expecta- tions, but effort has been made to provide an approach and guidance to students toward further learning resources. This book addresses the nuts and bolts and analytical side of Ayurvedic diagnostics. Its intent is to clear the haze surround- ing the concepts of Ayurvedic diagnostics by describing the fundamental principles of diagnostics. The material in this book
18 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana is both broad and deep in relation to diagnosis of diseases.The text is presented in a way that should make it accessible to any- one. It is a suitable textbook for undergraduate and postgradu- ate training in the Vikrti Vijiana and Roga Vijfidna. It is said that books are never finished, but that they are just abandoned. Finally, it may have seemed a foolhardy mission for a single author to attempt to write a comprehensive text on Vikrti Vijfiana and Roga Vijfiana. The Importance of the Subject Vikrti Vijfia@na and Roga Vijiana is a crucially important clinical subject because of its unique approach towards Ayurvedic diagnostics. It is for this reason that there is a sepa- rate section was made in all the Samhitas. Uniqueness of this Publication The component of this book provides complete know}l- edge towards understanding of the factors which are essential in the manifestation of disease along with it explains the clini- ‘cal methods for the diagnosis of diseases. It intends to provide a basic understanding of the Ayurvedic diagnostics to become a successful Ayurvedic physician. It is unique in providing in- formation related to clinical methods and laboratory diagnosis according to Ayurveda and Modern Medicine. The primary fo- cus is to generate interest among graduates of Ayurveda to adopt Ayurvedic diagnostics in their routine practice. The material has been organized meticulously in such a way that the student can easily understand, retain and reproduce it. Intended Readers Many devotees of Ayurveda may enjoy this book for the novelty of its fresh ideas and diagnostic chaHenge of Ayurvedic diagnostics. The intended readers of this book are the large and heterogeneous group of Students, Teachers, Research officers and Medical officers of Ayurvedic field. Preamble : 19 How to use the Beok The book is divided in 20 chapters, which are almost in- dependent and which can be utilized in parallel, Initial chapters deal with the basic components of diagnostics, latter chapters describe about the factors which are essential for the diagnosis of diseases. Appendix compiled at the end of the book consists of laboratory values of clinical significance, weights and mea- surement of normal body organs and significance of abnormal values Acknowledgements First, I thank all my family members for their continuous support while writing this book. My parents, Shivappa. N. Byadgi, and Puttavva. S. Byadgi and uncle Andaneppa N. B. and aunt Sunandavva. A. B; for educating me to learn about art of life along with unconditional support and encouragement to pursue my interests in my career. I am also thankful to all my sisters, brothers, brother in-law’s, sister in-laws and grand mother, father in-laws, mother in-laws, for their encouragement throughout my caréer. | convey my heartfelt thanks to my wife Sujatha, Son Yateesh and Daughter Yoshita for their uncondi-. tional love, support, encouragement and patience, without their help it would not have been possible for me to finish the task smoothly. I express my sincere thanks to my colleague Mangalagowri Rao for her encouragement and help. I am glad to thank all my teachers for their valuable guidance since my childhood. : I am also greatly indebted to Prof. P. V. Sharma, Prof. Srikantha Murthy, Prof. Bhagawan Dash, Prof. R. K. Sharma, © Prof. Harsh Mohan, Prof. R. H. Singh, Prof: M. Dwivedi, Prof. B. N. Upadhyay, Prof. C. B. Jha, Prof.N. P. Rai, Prof. S. D. Dube, Prof. S.B. Deshapande, Prof. B.P. Shaw, Prof. P.C. Tripathi, Prof. B.C. Jana, Prof. P.K. Debnath, Prof. Abichal Chattopadhyay, Prof. Prasanna Rao, Prof. G.B. Patil, Dr. B.K. Dwivedi, Dr. S.K.Tewari, who have inspired me. I express my sincere thanks to Director, IMS; Dean, Faculty of Ayurveda and -to-all my colleagues for their vital encouragement and support.
Apala Sengupta, Dr. Vijai Tilak, Dr. Muralidhar Paliwal, Dr. G. Meena, Dr. J. S Tripathi, Dr. K.H_H.S : . » Dr. S.H.A.S.Murthy, Dr. O. i Dr. Suresh. R.D. and Dr. S.K. Jaiswal. 7 DEO. P. Singh. Good will, love, affection a: has shown to me by my students. fo to: them. nd overwhelming enthusiasm r which I shall remain thankfal 4 I am thankful tg Jauhari process for their kind co opera- on while composing my book. I am extremely thankful to aukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan for pubiishing my book , Place : BHU, Varanasi Date : 16.02.07 Mahashivaratri Dr. Paranreés rappa S. Byadgi . Lecturer Department Of Vikriti Vigyan Faculty of Ayurveda, Dhanvatari Bhawan Institute of Medical Sciences Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005 E-mail : psbyadgi @rediffmail.com E-mail : shival 1972 @yahoo.co.in INTRODUCTION The word ’vikrti’ means change. Change may be in the form of either vrddhi or ksaya. The study of change in dosa, dusya, srotas, agni, kala, bala, desa, prakrti, vaya, etc. is called vikrti vijnana. This book is divided into two volumes. In first volume excusively about. vikrti vijfiana, under which 20 chap- ters are included. Vikrti vijfdna deals with the factors which are essential to understand disease process as well for the diagnosis of diseases. It is very much necessary to understand the basic concepts, which are related to manifestation, diagnosis and prog- nosis of disease. In second volume exclusively about the nidana paiicaka of diseases, which is very important for the diagnosis of diseases. So, it is essential to understand both vikyti vijnana & roga vijfiana in a proper manner to become successful clini- cian. Dosas may be subdivided into Saririka dosdas i:e vata, pitta and kapha and manasika dosds i:e raja and tama. arafire. yeSMOTEy we wt eet: | 3 ait att c.vioss It is accepted by our @chdaryas that without the involve- ment of dosas diseases won’t manifest in the body. That’s why it is necessary to understand the normalcy (samatva) and abnormalcy (ksaya, vrddhi, Gvarana) of dosdas in detail to know about physiological and pathological state of dosds. Equilib- rium state of dosas is responsible for the maintenance of nor- mal physiological functions. Certain diseases manifest purely by Saririka dosas i:e jvara, atisara, §opha, sosa, nanatmaja vikara of vata, pitta and kapha etc. Some diseases manifest due to vitiation in manasa dosas i:e kama, krodha, lobha, moha, irsya, mada, Soka, cittodvega, bhaya, harsa etc. But diseases may also manifest by simultaneous vitiation of both Saririka and mdanasika dosas i:e apasmara, unmdada etc. Depending on the nature of etiological factors dosas moves from one tract to another and manifest various disorders. Since
22 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiana no disease may manifest without the involvement of dosds, that’s why wise physician should recognize the symptoms of the dosds, even though not mentioned and treat accordingly. Understanding of dosavaha srotas is essential to know the importance of dogas in the development of disease. Root of origin and causative agent are the two main factors involved in the evolution of disease. It is accepted that disease is the out- come of imbalanced state of dosas. That’s why it is very much necessary to know in detail about dosds and this can be achieved by systemic study. Seven varieties of dhatu’s are described in detail namely rasa, rakta, mamsa, meda, asthi, majja, Sukra. Seven types of upadhatus are produced by the dhatu’s during metabolism are Stanya, rajas (rasa dhatu), kandara and siras (rakta dhatu), vasa and sattvaca (mamsa dhaGtu), sndyu,.sandhi and sveda (ineda dhatu), danta (asthi dhatu), kesa (majja dhatu) and ojas (Sukra dhatu). During equilibrium state seven dhdtus and upadhatus supports and nourishes the body. Dhatu’s may un- -dergo vrddhi (increase) or ksaya (depletion) depending on the nature of causative factors and produces various disorders. Upadhdtus also produces diseases when they become vitiated by dosas or due to abnormality in dhdtus. Food as well as dhdtus manifest malas during the process of digestion and metabolism are called SGririka mala and dhatu mala respectively. During normal state malas performs normal functions like providing strength, eliminating unwanted sub- stances etc. Abnormal state of malds either in the form of. vrddhi or kgaya \eading to development of various abnormalities in the body. Agni is responsible for strength, health, longevity, vital breath and it determines the quantity of food to be consumed. The word agni_ bala is used to denote the superiority, medioc- rity and inferiority nature of agni and accordingly it digest the good amount, moderate amount and less amount of food re- spectively. Satharagni, dhatvagni and bhutagni are the main , ae Introduction 23 agni’s present inside the body and performs normal digestion and metabolism functions. Jatharagni is the principle agni re- sponsible for disease and health. During the process of diges- tion jatharagni plays a vital role because it controlls the other agni’s as well as it initiates the process of digestion and it is also called Bhagavan ishvara (almighty god) and pitta. Due to its subtle nature it is very difficult to perceive him. Later diges- tion is controlled by bhitdgni and dhatwagni. Depending on the strength of agni it is divided into sama (normal), visama (irregular), tiksna (powerful) and manda (mild). Samagni state is a condition which is responsible for digestion of usual quan- tity of food. Other abnormal state of agni leads to development of various abnormalities in the body. Another kind of increase and decrease of the dhatus occur due to the debility and inten- sity of respective ‘pdcakamsa’ present within the dhatus. Srotasas present inside the body in a mess like network and helps for the transportation of nutrient substances to tissues and cells. Some people says that body is the conglomeration of. srotas and these are innumerable in number. It is the pre-requi- site for the maintenance of good health because without healthy srotas body cannot grow normally. Dosa-dusya sammurchana happens only during sroto vaisamya state and it is the main ~ phenomenon in the development of disease. Srotas are mainly classified into bahirmukha external path) and antarmukha (in- ternal path). Four kinds of abnormalities arises in the sroras i:e srotosafigha (obstruction), srotoatipravrtti (hy per function), - _ Sroto vimargagamana | (movements of contents from one chan- nels to other channels) and sroto siragranthi (any kinds of ab- normal growths inside the srotas). Study of srotas sheds light understanding of various sys- tems of the body. 25 kinds of srotas are described in detail . namely pranavaha srotas, udakavaha srotas, annavaha _srotas, rasavaha srotas, raktavaha ‘srotas, mamsavaha srotas, medavaha srotas, asthivaha srotas, majjavaha srotas, Sukravaha srotas, mittravaha srotas, purisavaha srotas, svedavaha srotas, Grtavavaha srotas, stanyavaha srotas,
24 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana manovaha srotas, vdtavaha srotas, pittavaha srotas, kaphavaha ‘srotas, sarvavaha srotas, samjfivaha srotas, svaravaha srotas and ojovaha srotas. The concept of kriyakdla has been widely described in two separate entities as rtu kriyakdla and vyddhi kriyakaéla. Under rtu kriyakala normal physiological variations of dosa in respec- tive season has been discussed and accordingly certain mea- sures are described in rtucarya to overcome the adverse ef- fects. Vyddhi kriyakala described by Suésruta gives an idea about the consecutive stages of the disease and accordingly preven- tive measures were described to over come complications. Early diagnosis of disease helps to cure the disease successfully with- out much discomfort in planning treatment. If physician able to detect the changes in early stages like sancaya (accumulation), prakopa etc. based on the manifestation of dosa symptomatology and advises the preventive measures at that stage to prevent further stages, so that disease may not become ’ stronger. One who is suffering from misery, pain, discomfort, dis- pleasure, distress, uneasiness, difficulty, uncomfortableness is called vyadhi. It may manifest due to various physical, emo- tional and mental causes. Many classifications has been made to understand the concept of vydadhi i:e based on prabhava, bala, adhistana, kriyd, nimitta, asaya, kdrana, marga, karma, dosa etc. Complete knowledge of vyadhi is essential to plan suitable therapeutics to get desirable results. Ama is a condition develops due to abnormal functions of agni’s. It is an improperly or not having been properly pro- cessed during digestion and metabolism as a result undigested food subtances evolves in the form of dma. It initiates certain reactions inside the body and manifests visicika and alasaka. If this dma remains inside the gastro intestinal tract for longer duration get converted to suktabhava as a result amavisa mani- fest and develops reactions inside the body like poison. When Gma combines with dosa and disya it is called sama Introduction 25 state, which is responsible for the genesis of diseases. Ama de- velops at various levels i:e at the level of jathardgni, dhatvagni and bhittagni. It is in the form of liquid, heavy, abnormal colour, slimy, thready, foulsmell, increased sourness, excess in quan- tity, increased turbidity. It is responsible for the development of pain and it is a powerful causative agent for the-evolution of most of the diseases. Sama and nirama condition of dosa, dhatu, mala (Saririka and dhatu mala) indicates pathological and physi- ological state of the body respectively. It may be understood by observing symptoms and signs of respective vitiations. Janapadadhvamsa means mass people get afflicted with diseases due to vitiated air, water, land and season and de- stroy the whole region. These abnormalities may manifest due to abnormal movement of planets, calamities, sinful acts and such other factors which are capable of bringing abnor- mality in air, water, land and season. As a result various dreadful diseases manifest to whole locality and these dis- ease can be managed with difficulty with proper assurance and medicaments, Certain symptoms and signs manifest after the develop- ment of main disease due to excessive aggravation of involved dosas, disyas, etc. or by consumption of etiological factors in excess after the formation of main disease or not undergoing proper therapeutics is called upadrava. It may be a minor or major. Once the upadrava develops it indicates the severity of the disease. If the upadrava is mild to moderate then disease may becomes curable with difficulty provided if it is supported by other factors. Complete manifestation of upadrava indicates incurable nature or manageable nature of the ‘disease. Generally upadrava subsides once the main disease is cured. It modifies the course of the disease leading to severity of the condition. That’s why treatment must be initiated as early as possible, if the upadrava is strong. Eight major incurable diseases are described i.e. vata vyadhi, asmari, kustha, meha, udara roga, bhagandara, arsa 2Vik. & Roga
26 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana and grahant. Difference of openion exist between Caraka, SuSruta and Vaghbara in the nomenecature of astamahagada. Caraka doesn’t included asmari, bhagandara, aréa, grahani instead he mentioned apasmara, sopha, gulma, rajayaksma, vatavyadhi, kugtha, madhumeha & udara roga. Sugruta included miudhagarbha under astamahagada. Knowledge of mahagada is very much important to convey the prognosis of the disease. Other than eight major groups, certain diseases may be consid- ered as mahagada based on the nature of upadrava and bala. If all the upadrava laksanas observed along with depletion of mamsa, Sonita, bala etc. leading to development of mahdagada. Astanindita purusa means person who is not fulfilling the criteria to prescribe general principles of treatments. For these people special therapeutic procedures has to be designed to get success in treatment. Eight varieties are atidirgha, atihrsva, atiloma, alomd,‘atikrsna, atigaura, atisthula and atikrsa. Gangadhara included 3 more to the above list i.e. kubja, kana, banghura. These variations may be due to hormonal imbal- ance or hereditary defects. : Appearance of certain symptoms and signs indicates death of the patient is called arista. Death may not be there in the absence of arista. Arista observed in patient is called purusa samSraya arista and those observed via messenger, condition of patient house, physician observes certain things on his way to patient house etc. is called purusamanasrta. Knowl- edge of arista is essential to understand the prognosis of the disease. The human body has the ability to resist almost all types of organisms or toxins that tend to damage the tissues and organs. This capacity. is called vyadhiksamatva. Two kinds of vyadhiksamatva described by Cakrapdni i:e one which helps to eliminate the causative agent and another one which is capable of preventing the manifestation of diseases. Vyaddhibala viredhitvam does not develop unitl the body is first attacked by a bacterial disease or a toxin, often requiring weeks or months to develop. Introduction 27 Vyadhyutpadda pratibandhaka results from natural process, rather than from processes directed at specific disease organ- isms. All persons are not capable of resisting diseases. For ex- ample over obsese, over emaciated, whose mental faculties are weak etc. are unable to resist against diseases. Persons who are: capable of resisting against diseases are svastha, consumption of proper amount of food, adaptation of daily routine, observa- tion of good conduct and behavior, sama prakrti purusa, sarva sGra purusa, pravarasdra purusa, pravara samhanana, pravara pramana, pravara Ghara sakti, pravara vyayama Sakti, pravara satmya, pravara satva, yauvana, sama dosa, samagni, samadhatu, sama mala, prasanna atma, mana and indriya, svabhava samsiddhi etc. Para ojas is one of the purest, finest form of saptadhatus and its abnormality leads to death and its quantity is 8 drops. Some people says it is the upadhatu of Sukra. It is very best substance, soft, possesses the qualities of water, pure, slightly reddish with yellowish tinge, it is the first essential element of the embryo, the essence of rasa dhatu of the foetus and gets localised in the heart of the foetus before the development of other body parts. It resides in the heart and from their it circulates to all body parts via ojovaha srotas and helps to perform normal activities. Its decrease causes loss of strength, complexion, discomfort in mind dnd sense organs, and lastly death. Aparaojas which is half afjali similar to that of kapha, circulates all over the body along with rasadhatu, confer the body with two kinds of strength i:e physical strength and strength to resist diseases. Three varieties of abnormalities develop namely Ojoksaya, ojovyapat and ojo visramsa. Ojovaha srotas carries the para ojas and apara ojas to their proper destina- tions. It’s abnormality manifest due to dhatu.ksaya, abhighata etc. Hatuajasa jvara, ojo nirodhaja jvara, rajayaksma, prameha etc. manifest due to abnormality in ofjovaha srotas. Five means of diagnosis (nidana paficaka) namely nidana,
28 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana (purvarupa, rupa, upaSaya.and samprapti are included under ‘roga partksa. Knowledge of nidana paficaka is essential for diaznosis, prognosis, treatment, differential diagnosis etc. Roga pariksd@ is classified into various methods by various acaryas namely dvividha pariksa (pratyaksa & anumana), trividha pariksa ( daréana, sparsana & prasna), trividha pariksa (pratyaksa, anumana, Gptopadesa), sad vidha pariksa@ (sparsa nendriya, $§rotrendirya, caksurindriya, rasanendriya, ghranendriya, prasna), astasthana niriksana, (nadi, mitra, mala, jihvd, Sabda, sparsa, drk, akrti), dasavidha pariksa (prakrti, vikrti, sara, samhanana, pramana, satva, satmya, Ghara Sakti, vyayama Sakti, vaya) and Sugrutokta dvadasa pariksa ' (Ayu, vyadhi, rtu, agni, vaya, deha, bala, satva, satmya, prakrti, bhesaja and dea). It is very much essential to prescribe the therapy to the patient, which constitutes karya deSa or the site for the admin- istration of therapies with a view to bring back the normalcy among dosa, dhdtu etc. The purpose of examination is to ob- tain knowledge regarding the span of life, strength and the in- tensity of morbidity, because if a physician having not exam- ined properly administers intensely potent drug suddenly, it may kill the patient. Weak. patients are incapable of resisting strong therapies like medicaments ‘dominating in agni and vayu mahabhitas, application of alkalies and heat (cauterization) and surgical operations. They may cause instantaneous death due to unbearable and over intense impulse of the drug. Keeping this in mind, the physicians should treat the weak patients with drugs which are unharmful, mild, delicate, heavy in progres- ‘sive order. Mild medicaments should be prescribed to ladies because they have unstable, soft, bare and timid heart and they are delicate, weak and subordinate to others. In brief, prescribed therapy should not be injurious to the body and mind. Stronger therapies that are neither distressing during their digestion nor associated with serious complications may be administered stowly and gradually. Similarly, if weak therapies are adminis- tered to a strong individual having a serious disease without Introduction 29 proper examination, ‘the disease does not get cured. Hence, the patient should be examined in respect of prakrti (constitution), vikrti (morbidity), sara (excellence of dhatus), sarnhanana (com- pactness of organs), pramdna (measurements of the organs of the body), satmya (suitability), satva (psychic conditions), @hara Sakti (power of intake and digestion of food), vyayama Sakti (power of performing exercise) and vaya (ageing) in order to ascertain his strength and the intensity of the morbidity. Ayu, vyadhi, rtu, agni, vaya, deha, bala, satva,-satmya, prakrti, bhesaja and desa should be examined before planning line of treatment. Depending on the prognosis of the disease one should plan the line-of treatment. The one who administer the therapeutic after proper assessment of tvelve factors, he will be able to save the people of the world from dreadful diseases.
re Indo-Romanic Equivalents of Devanagari Alphabets oa dt a tal a gy 4 a Ad tha a ow aa ad dt gf ig al A of (Transliteration of Symbols) ~~ oc me op gha ha ca th cha ja jb Sms e aS 2 — aX (Vowels) S444 V4 A aot (Consonants) ay gd aw gS eat gq a aya a Wold aA 4 th tha d da . dh dha na a tha da dh dha na pa ph Pha aay Seam aa g aagaad aaa my ba bh, bha m,ma yya Ila Vv, va sa ~ D> RRR REREEBEADAAANA foal ~ ABBREVIATION Caraka Indriyasthana Caraka Vimanasthana Caraka Cikitsasthana Caraka Sutrasthana Caraka Sarirasthana Caraka Nidanasthana Sugruta Sutrasthana Sugruta Cikitsasthana SuSruta Niddnasthana Sugsruta Uttaratantra Asténga Samgraha Sutrasthana Astanga : Samgraha Nidanasthana Ast@nga Samgraha Sarirasthana Astanga Samgraha Cikitsdsthana Astanga Hrdaya Sutrasthana Astanga Hrdaya Nidanasthana Astanga Hrdaya Cikitsasthana Astanga Hrdaya Sarirasthana Madhava Nidana KaSyapa Samhita Khilasthana Kasyapa Samhita Sutrasthana Sarangadhara Samhita Purvakhanda
Ch.No. SCNAWA BN = 11 12 13 14 15 16 17. 18 19) 20 CONTENT Name of the Chapter Dosa Dosavaha Srotas Dhatu Mala Agni Srotas Kriyakala Vyadhi Ama Janapadadhvamsa Upadrava Asta Mahagada Asta Nindita Purusa Arista . Vyadhiksamatva Ojovaha Srotas Nidana Paficaka © Rogi Partksa and Roga Pariksa Dafgavidha Pariksa SuSrutokta Dvadaga Pariksa Appendix Index Page No. 1-39 40-49 50-60 61-66 67-77 78-118 119-128 129-189 190-207 208-213 214-227 228-237 238-244 245-291 292-305 306-313 314-371 372-422 423-478 479-487 488-525 526-544 Chapter 1 ate (Dosa) Ws arahdt gear ae aia: 1 am wit ama fim a aa a at okt urd ai ata farg i faa ett af ae C.Ci 28/246-247 It is very difficult to understand the movements of wind, sun and moon, similarly the activities of vata, pitta and kapha are difficult to ascertain. Physician must ascertain the various states of dosds i.e. diminution, aggravation, equilibrium and occlusion of dosds, then plan suitable therapeutics. wWaet (Equilibrium State of Dosas) aeengquenge fe We, TETARGE TATUTTETATTAIENTT 1 S.Su. 15/3 Dosa, dhatu and mala are the main factors for the founda- tions of the body. That’s why knowledge of these is very im- portant. . arg: fit anata: vient deez: 1 AM: YAeest wit qt wa aii- C.Su. 1/57 Vata, pitta and kapha are physical dosds i.e. Saririka dosas and raja and tama are the mental dosdas i.e. manasika dosas. RATHI ary: | arate font | see: Oferta vere I A.S.Su. 20/1 Vayu and &kasa mahabhita forms vata dosa, agni bhiuta forms pitta and Gpa and prthvi bhittas form kapha.
2 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana ae WI (Dosa guna (Properties of Dosas)] Guna of Vata Dosa Ba: vit cg: Gengeiisa fase: Gr | fertinistetted: : area 1 C.Su. 1/59 Properties of vata are rough, cold, light, subtle, mobile, nonslimy and coarse and-is pacified by medicines having op- posite qualities. Guna of Pitta Dosa weg digi a wane at me! fart: «fit ee weer) : C.Su. 1/60 Properties of pitta are unctuous, hot, sharp, liquid, sour, mobile and pungent and relieved by medicines having oppo- site qualities. Guna of Kapha Dosa \ yer: owe aka feertergefor: 11 C.Su. 1/61 Properties of kapha are heaviness, coldness, softness, unc- tuousness, sweetness, immobility and sliminess and are recon- ciled by therapies which are having opposite qualities. Normal Functions of Dosas alt Be (Vata Dosa) ™, Terenas ag: wee wie: wreat arcake | S.Su. 15/3 Vata supports the body by performing functions like move- ment, perception, filling, separation and retaining. wat Mat ufmat art: await iy C su 18/49 Dosa 3 The normal functions of vata are enthusiasm, inspiration, expiration, movements, normal formation of dha@tus, and proper eliminations of excreta. ania: ut aq: darngweaniggs wearin ym: sitter, Whee 11 C. Ci, 3/38-39 When vata combines with agni produces heat but in com- bination with soma (kapha) produces cold, that’s why it is called _ yogavahi (synergist). fart aa (Pitta Dosa) TERETE fit agen wleEafretons gre awe 1 S.Su. 15/3 Pitta supports the body by performing functions such as colouring, digestion, production of ojas, vision, intelligence . body temperature along with other functions of agni and it is of five types. ait aves a aye aeaday wat weet Aer a fawaniferarsry i) C Su 18/50 The normal functions of pitta are clarity in vision, good digestion, maintenance of body temperature, hunger and thirst, softness in body parts, lustre, happiness and intelligence. @e ae (Kapha Dosa) TeHHAoIS TAS Be V1 S.Su. 15/4 Kapha supports the body by performing functions like binding of joints, unction, healing, saturation, giving strength and stability to body and such other functions of water and it is of five types. Sat wa: fers a tid gaa ae amt ghey araennifrenreenmyt! C. Su 18/51 The normal functions of kapha are unctvousness, cohe-
4 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana sion, firmness, heaviness, Potency, strength, forbearance, pa- tience and absence of greed. Abnormal Functions of vata wronrgeaeures | C.Su. 12/8 Abnormal vata performs various afflictions to the body there by it produces various diseases. It also affects the strengih, - complexion, happiness and longevity. It disturbs the functions of mind, afflicts all sense faculties, deforms and destroy the embryo for long. As a result it gives rise to fear, grief, confu- . sion. poxiety and excessive delirium and finally stops the vital reath. Abnormal Functions of Pitta afta wet frarcia: pleat: Ways awakes; Tarn we tite wenafteterndth arrafor sear 11. Su. 12/11 Agni is represented by pitta in the body and produces good : or bad effects depending on its normal or abnormal State, i.e. digestion or indigestion, vision or loss of vision, normal or ab- normal temperature, normal or abnormal complexion, valour and ‘fear, anger.and joy, confusion and clarity and other dual functions. Abnormal Functions of Kapha Tagen wifaea: wer zara wa wat yeeuanta: arauiin sari 1) C. Su. 12/12 Soma which is represented by kapha and gives rise to good or bad effects depending on its. normalcy and abnormalcy i.e. Dosa 5 firmness and laxity, plumpness and emaciation, enthusiasm and laziness, potency and impotency, knowledge and ignorance, understanding and confusion and such other dual functions. alWieart (Locations of Vata Dosa) wa Uealgra: wie: afaert aerate aa wag a arenas | ara a Vaasa fastacr | A.S.Su. 20/1 Intestines, waist, thighs, feet, bones, ears and skin. Intes- tines are the main seats. fea (Locations of Pitta Dosa) aifarmag: wel eriten Sire ag: wast a freer ara arfafaigreat | A.S.Su. 20/1 Umbilicus, stomach and duodenum, sweat, lymph, blood, eyes, touch (skin) and. its main location is umbilicus. SACI (Locations of Kapha Dosa) ; Bt: @us: fre: aria vafvarngat TH Fal wot tat a ROOT | STATA: Tag | A.S.Su. 20/1 Chest, throat, head, pancreas, joints, stomach and duode- num, Rasadhatu, Medadhatu, nose, tongue and its special lo- cation is chest. semeinettedahra torn seaaer wrttenne ra Leora fertteay | amg dtm tee fertang wom sqeait | SNCON- wa: | Alera cuTEnacqeKaned ASM: | FLORAL ET gfe i A.S.Su 20/1 Body is firmly supported by vata, pitta and kapha dosa, which are situated in the lower, middle and upper portions re- spectively. It supports the body just like house is supported by three pillars. These are called pillars: because these supports and maintains the firmness of the body. Dosas also called dhatus because they support the body. Dosds also called malas due to their vitiation property. One which pollutes the body is called
6 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiidna mala and these are the waste products of food and these are also called dosas due to their tendency to vitiate others. waa (Five Types of Vata) TWRAAARRAMMMaM: UB Usa! ee wet waQ wreeneyIil Cc ci 28/5 wie Cae aMPNI wa a ; TUM Fred: ws amaha wiftemci: = s. Ni. 1712 a wt wae wer fer waar Wuterearaarnarsaeay: | AS.Su 20/2 Vata is divided into five sub types namely prana, udana, vyana, samdna and apana vata. wWurelid (Prana Vata) Tar woret yait: auvafrgreanite: | Srraagamvamennte st til Ci 286 wa wT yaaa: aUsRaN qelfaageatet- tI A.S.Su 20/2 a argdearart a awit ae dere 1 Wise ways: wmigavaaenat i WANT: Fed ger ReTEATETAESL TEAL | S. Ni, 1/13-14 Locations Head (main seat), throat, chest, tongue, mouth and nose. Functions © Maintenance of intellect, sense faculties, heart, mind and blood vessels. e Helps for expectoration, sneezing, belching, inspiration, expiration, swallowing of ‘food and such other similar functions. Vata which moves in the mouth is known as prana. It supports the body and helps for the movement of in- Dosa 7 gested food and maintains the functions of prdana. Diseases . Hikka, Svasa, kasa, rajayaksma, svarabheda, uraksata, manasa vikara etc. art ald (Udaina Vata) BATT UA: THR AR: BUS Wa TI arenatt: wacitit aeanife wt ail Cc ci 287 zam stearate: wuarter-atet arpraharact alacrautata: vioreitatrestreatateraiefna: 1 AS. Su 20/2 sat aa aeqediqfa | Gerth: I at onftrerettenfeferstats fermenter 11 sedugramy wa wif a fasted: |S. Ni 114-15 Locations Chest (mains seat), throat, nose and umbilicus. Functions e It is also called pavanottama and moves in upward di- rection is known as udana. e Helps for production of speech, singing activities, valour, strength, complexion, nourishing the tissue pores, dis- ‘ crimination, courage, memory, awakening of the mind and such other functions. Diseases Urdhvajatrugata i.e. diseases of head, nose, mouth, eyes, . ears, neck. ae att (Vyadna Vata) ae aneifa ad gq cam: vitanfager Tfamarconaarrantatra: Wart Cc. Ci 26/9 ert punto geet nega qq
8 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Reenfnet fries araea faery ant aa wae anjentatt | AS.Su 20/2 eee at cadasitea: | rae Sane use Bearcats | wera ged Vy way: weeps §. Ni 1/17-18 Location Heart (main seat) and pervaded all over the body. Functions ¢ Moves with great speed. ¢ Helps for locomotory activities, extension, contraction, upward movement, downward movement, side ward movement, opening and closing of eyelids, yawning, identifies the taste of food, purification of channels, causing the flow of sweat and blood, helps for the pro- liferation of sperms inside the female genital tract, di- vides the nutrient portion and waste product of the food, and nourishes all the dhdtus in a Proper manner by sup- plying necessary nutrients to all cells and tissues. e It circulates the rasa to the entire body. Diseases : Paksaghata, ardita, apatanaka, apatantraka, prameha, Sukradosa etc. : TAM ald (Samana Vata) waadrganrdi staift waferftea: | ara uryedeer: —aaristaaema: 11 C. ci 28/8 . A.S.Su 20/2 Tisat weft asniva fastnfattinfe 11 Uenirerentryds pet Mal 1S. Ni 1/16-17 Dosa 9 Location e Near the digestive fire i.e. agni (main seat) moves in- side the stomach, intestines, §vedavaha srotas, dosa vaha srotas, ambu vaha srotas, §ukravaha srotas, G@rtavavaha srotas. Functions Promotes the power of digestion. Supports the functions of organs wherever it moves, helps for the retainment of food in the alimentary tract, separates the essence from waste products and helps for the downward movement of waste products and such other functions. Diseases Gulma, agnisada, atisdra, grahani roga, grahani gada, agnimandya, ajirna, pravahika etc. SAM Alt (Apana Vita) wot ahead a age deh yey TIAA: = _- ae a Geeardaret a gat: carafterarvert | wand pet eet oda dem: tt c ci 28/10-11 Tread santtriggorageniset farqa- yeerdeandPreamronteticar sft 11 A.S.Su 20/2 CSTSAASa: srt af aera: | wk: wet wena ai Part Hed ry Wey afer: ss. Ni. 1/19 Location e Rectum (main seat), large intestine, two testicles, uri- nary bladder, phallus, umbilicus, thighs, groin, anus and colon. Functions ¢ Elimination of faecal matter, urine and menstrual fluid. 3Vik. & Roga
10 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana e Helps for the ejaculation of Sukri. e Helps for parturition of foetus. Diseases e Discases of bladder and rectum, mutraghata, miutrakrechra, asmari, arsa, bhagandara, klaibya, pradara, mudhagarbha, prameha, Sukradosa etc. walt (Five Types of Pitta) UAHA aes MSA: Tz | e Pitta is divided into five subtypes namely pacaka, ranjaka, sadhaka, alocaka and bhrajaka pitta. A.S.Su 20/3 aran fot (Pacaka Pitia) crerafefisern eramfireres Rermeei war erefengh ferent ser a frre meMtarana aq aerahiegqerd | A.S.Su 20/3 Location It resides between the Gmdsaya and pakvasaya. Properties It is composed of five mahabhitdas, out of which tejobhuta is predominant and a@pabhita is less predominant, that’s why it is devoid of the qualities of liquids. By the support of vata, kledata (moistureness) and others it performs its normal func- tions. Functions It performs the digestion and metabolic activities, hence it , is called agni. It transforms the food substances into usable form for the nutritions of cells and tissues. It separates the essence and waste products of the diges- tion. Residing in its own place, it supports the other pittas to perform their normal functions and also dha@tvagni’s. en Dosa 11 Diseases Grahani roga, grahani gada, agnimandya, ajirna, alasaka, atisara, udara roga, arsa etc. tan Tra (Raiijaka Pitta) AAP | TAT THAT | Location gf S.Su 20/3 Amasaya Functions . - it imparts red colour tO rasa. Diseases . Kamala, Halimaka, Pandu, etc. mee TH (Sadhaka Pitta) Ceres Graver raraeae cA MATa I A.S.Su 20/3 Location Heart Functions It is the substance present in heart helps for achieving goals. Discrimination, intelligence, pride and enthasiasm alt depend on sadhaka pitta. — Diseases Hrdroga, Manasa vikdra etc. steitern fit (Alocaka Pitta) aired eareiterrerciteey | Location A.S.Su 20/3 Eyes Functions It helps for vision
12 Ayurvediya Vikrti Viana & Roga Vijfiana Diseases Disorders of eye iste fort a inten Pitta) ses TRA | roe UPeaRe GUAT WeRTETafe 1 A.S:Su 20/3 yotation Skin Functions It is responsible for expression of colour. It helps to ab- sorb & digest the substances used in the form of oil massage, water bath, application of paste or unguents. It reflects the com- plexion. Diseases Kustha, Visarpa, Vata rakta. etc. WAH (Five Types of Kapha) MAT AHAACHMNTH AHA AIS: VAG | A.S.Su 20/4 Kapha is divided into five subtypes namely avalambaka, kledaka, bodhaka, tarpaka and Slesaka. FATAG HG (A valambhaka Kapha) A.S.Su 20/4 © Location Chest Functions e It helps to perform smooth functions around the shoul- ders, arms, neck. It helps to heart to perform its normal functions by its nourishing property. i Dosa 13 e It supports the other kaphds to carry out their routine work by contributing the properties of water. e It supports the body. Diseases Rajayaksma, Hrdroga, Avabhahuka, Visvaci, Kasa, etc. wean WH (Kledaka Kapha) Srarsrafeais Hage FAC aH: 1 A.S.Su 20/4 Location ; Amasaya (Stomach) Functions Moisten the solid food Diseases Arocaka, Ajirna, Amavata etc. @leiaH BG (Bodhaka Kapha) TEARS: TTT, TT: | A.S,Su 20/4 Location Tongue Function Helps for the appreciation of taste. Disease Arocaka, Arasajiiata, ASyavairasya, ASraddha, Jvara, etc. ada we (Tarpaka Kapha) frees txaadong aden: | Location Head Functions A.S.Su 20/4 Nourishes the sense organs
14 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Diseases Endriyaka roga, Paksaghdata etc. VaR Hw (Slesaka Kapha) qdeats eraPaseaung yess sft | Location A.S.Su 20/4 Joints Functions Provides lubrication to Joints Diseases Sandhivata, Amavata, Vatarakta etc. WA & WeRlt (Caya and Prakopa) Tenniig cary yfrenfergan: warcrenieatiriis fe arated veraren ade 1 aot akafe Ber 1 eevalasaa t4s.su 20/5 aa Hedahtagrt seearqTena Tat ears: | gfe: oo qatet | ereifracincgqudernnafit | 5.su 15/73 Vata, pitta and slesma are circulating all over the body and observed abundandantly in certain places. Vrddhi is of two types i.e. (i) caya and (ii) prakopa. ald Aq (Vata Caya) aronyoNaheat Baw art: waa 1 A.S.Su20/5 Ruksadi qualities of vata if associates with usna properties leads to vata saficaya. ala vata w WR (Vata Prakopa and Vata Prasama) viquiated: wetqenquiafern: Rarenea: TEA | A.S.Su 20/5 Riksddi qualities of vata if associates with Sita properties leads to vata prakopa. Dosa 15 Snigdhadi qualities of vata if associates with usna leads to vata prasama. ‘ftracera, fort venta wel fire ISTH (Pitta Saficaya, Pitta Prakopa and Pitta PrasSama) onateat wares WIT | A.S.Su 20/5 ; Tiksndadi qualities of pitta if associates with Sita causes pitta sancaya, Tiksnddi qualities of pitta if associates with usna leads to pitta prakopa. Sitadi qualities of pitta if associates with mandata (slowness) leads to pitta prasama. oh waa, Ba WAT wa BH WIT (Kapha Saficaya, Kapha Prakopa and Kapha Prasama) non viaunatem: farerea: anne caqunitatear: ward Tat qT BaNes: WITLI A.S.Su 20/5 Snigdhadi quatities of kapha. if associated with Sita causes Kapha sancaya. Snigdhadi qualities of kapha if associates with. usna properties leads to kapha prakopa. Ruksadi qualities of kapha if associates with usna brings pacification in kapha. ae aura wa area (Dosa variations and normalcy) ation stefa ferg wa, cat: ta we SAT ILC. Su 17/62 Dosas, if aggravated manifest signs and symptoms in ac- cordance with degree of aggravation i.e. excessive, moderate and slight aggravation of the dosds reflect itself. in the form of -excessiveness, moderateness and slightness (weakness) of the signs and symptoms. Doss, if diminished manifest signs and symptoms in a feeble manner or cease to manifest even their normal signs and symptoms. Diminished state of dosas are not capable of vitiat- ~ ing other dhdtus as a result disease will not. manifest. But once .
16 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana dosas ceases its normal functions it will disturb the entire physi- ological functions as a result it may cause diseases or diminu- tion of the dosGs may not be capable to counter act the patho- genetic factors, that’s why person will suffer from diseases. Equilibrium state of dosds represents healthy state of the body and dosds operates their own functions normally. Sixty-two varieties of permutation and combination of dosGs definitely manifest symptomatology. alt Bex AAMT (Vata Vrddhi Laksana) WA, Ania aTauTERt arp wares map orenanfirar Fre . Weisedaered Meade B | S.Su 15/13 HTP ACT TAH CUNT ST MATAR ATA ANTE digafe 1 A.S.Su 19/3 HTT ATRL PTA ETAT RHO TEA ere referee ET A ere - TTR Bree aaa het A ara: aaaifar; wad anigarntaraacad 1 ‘ C.Su 20/12 1. Karsya - Emaciation 2. Karsnya - Blackish discoloration 3. Gatra sphirana - Throbbing sensation in body parts 4. G4atra kampa - Tremors 5. Usna kamita - Desire for warmthness 6. Safijna - Loss of Consciousness 7. Nidranaga - Loss of sleep 8. Alpa balatva - _ Decrease in strength 9. Gada varca - Hard Stools 10.Indriyopaghata - Diminution of function of sen- sory faculties 11. Asthisila | - Pain in the bones 12. Majja Sosa - Diminution of bone marrow 13.Mala sanga 14. Adhmana 15.Atopa 16.Moha 17. Dainye 18. Pxaya 19. Soka 20. Pralapa 21. Vak parusya 22.Sramsa 23.Bhramsa 24. Vyasa 25.Sanga 26. Bheda 27.Sada 28. Harsa 29.Tarsa 30. Varta 31.Cala 32.Toda 33. Vyatha 34.Cesta 35.Khara 36. Parusa 37. Visada 38. Susira 39.Aruna varna 40. Kasaya rasa 41. Virasa mukha 42. Sosa 43. Sila 44. Supti 45. Sankoca 46. Stambha Dosa 17 Constipation Distension of abdomen due to vata Gurgling sound in the intestine Delusion Timidity Fear Giier “2 Delirium Harshness of Speech Looseness Dislocation Expansion Obstruction Separation Depression Excitation Thirst ; Circular movement Motion Piercing pain Pain or discomfort Increased activities Coarseness Harshness Non Sliminess Porousness Reddish lustre Astringent taste in mouth Tastelessness in mouth Wasting Various kinds of pain Numbness ‘ Contraction Rigidity
10 ayurvediya Vikrti Vijnana & Roga Vijiiana 47. Khaiija -. Lameness 48. Increase in qualities and actions of vata Proper examination is essential to know the condition of the dosds. fea afe Mat (Pitta Vrdehii Laksana) wii rardtted tirana & | S.Su 15/13 tranaritsaddeiisitcaasimtaens eTelecare Wpsteahaararntara: fry | A.S.Su 19/3 C.Su 20/15 1. Pitavabhdsata - Yellowish discolouration of the body. 2. Santapa - Increased body temperature 3. Sitakdmitva ~ Desire for cold things 4. Alpanidrata + Disturbed sleep or diminished sleep 5. Murccha - Fainting 6. Balahani - Loss of strength 7. Indriya dourbalya - Weakness in sense organs 8. Pitavinmiutranetratvam - Yellowish discolouration of stool, urine, eyes. 9. Glani ~ Fatigue 10. Ojovisramsa - Displacement of Ojas 11.Daha - Burning sensation 12. Tiktasyata - Bitter taste in mouth 13.Trsna - Thirst 14. Krodha - Anger 15. Paka - Suppuration 16. Sveda - Excessive perspiration 17. Kleda - Sloughing Dosa 19 18.Kotha - Putrification 19. Kandu - Itching 20. Srava ~ Discharge 21.Raga - Redness - Exhibition of inherent smell i.e. fishy smell, all colours except white and red, pungent and sour taste 23.Enhanced qualities of pitta along with excacerbated functions. wu fs WAN (Kapha Vrddhi Laksaya) eberfergerast 1 S.Su 15/13 aeadrreicacrerixanercar: frearneatran Pararctcarea— waserreliraeatafascrntefa: vera 11 A.S.Su 19/3 erat aeersiernagedeh irae y ctercia aa eara aA anf sasror: nif; axhad etafaertarcraeag || 22. Yathasvam ca. gandha varna rasa bhi nirvartanam C.Su 20/18 1. Souklyam - Whitish discolouration 2. Saityam - Coldness 3. Sthairyam - Sluggish or absence of move- ments 4, Gaurava - Heaviness 5. Avasada - Debility 6. Tandra - Stupor 7. Nidra - Sleep . 8. Sandhi vislesa - Looseness in joints 9. Sthaulya ° - Obesity or plumpness 10.Alasya - Fatigue 11.Srotah pidhana - Obstruction in channels 12.Murcha - Fainting 13. Svasa - Difficulty in breathing
j Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana 14. Kasa - Cough 15. Praseka - Excessive salivation 16. Hrllasa - Nausea 17. Agnisada - Weakness in digestive func- tions 18. Kandu - Itching 19. Sneha - Unctuousness 20. Supti - Numbness 21.Kleda - Stickiness 22.Upadeha - Accumulation of waste sub- stances over body 23.Bandha - Obstruction to normal path 24. Madhurya - Sweet taste in mouth 25. Cirakaritva - Chronicity of the diseases. 26. Excacerbation of normal qualities and properties ald Wa cat (Vata Ksaya Laksana) WA, Alctaees HAAS S PAATRAAMTaT SAAT Ab S.Su 15/7 . Ry i A.S.Su 19/5 1. Manda cestata - Diminished activities 2. Alpa vak - Speak less or loss of speech 3. Apraharsa - Lack of excitation 4. Miudha safijata © - Diminished mental faculties 5. Praseka - Excessive salivation 6. Aruci - Anorexia 7. Hrllasa - Nausea 8. Sanja - Loss of consciousness 9. Moha - Delusion 10.Anga sada - Debility 11.Agni vaisamya - Disorders of digestion 12. Diminution of qualities and properties of vata fra aa MAT (Pitta Ksaya Laksana) firaara watenfirn Free a | S.Su 15/7 f Dosa 21 2 moe - Oo ray N 13. A.S.Su 19/5 Mandosmata - Diminished body temperature Mandagnita - Sluggish digestive functions Nisprabhata - Loss of complexion Stambha - Stiffness Saitya - Coldness Aniyata toda - Irregular pains Arocaka - Anorexia Avipadka - Indigestion Anga parusya - Roughness in body parts .Kampa - Tremors . Gaurava - Heaviness .Nakha, nayana - Whitish discolouration of nails Souklyam and eyes. Diminished qualities and properties of pitta SR Aa AAT (Kapha Ksaya Laksana) FAMTA BAAS ASS STAT AATTA ATTA AM Ae ere (won dees wari) At S.Su 15/7 WHEAT ACTA TATE STATA eT Viaea- ceaRayesTayPaMaha: FAST 1 Ll. 2. 3. = CMI AKA 0. A.S.Su 19/5 Ruksata - Dryness in body Antardaha - Burning sensation inside Amaseyatara Slesma - Emptiness of slesma in @maSaya sunyata (stomach) and other places of kapha Sandhi §aithilya - Looseness of joints Trsna - Thirst Daurbalya - Debility Prajagarana - Loss of sleep in night Bhrama - Giddiness Udvestana : - Twitching pain Angamarda - Body aches
22 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana 11.Pariplosa 1 Mild burning sensation 12.Toda - Pricking pain 13. Dava Daha - Localised burning sensation 14, Sphotana ~ Bursting 15. Vepana - Tremors 16. Dhumayana - Hot fumes comes out from mouth 17. Hrdayadrava - Palpitations 18. Reduction in qualities and properties of kapha STAC (Avarana) Tend Brae dig arpa saa weary srt: gla: frat eal TATA ARTS a aa WA MAN TAL HUA | Te Tare aa aa faray sea | C.Ci 28/59-60 (Cakrapéni) All the three dosds circulate all over the body through chan- nels. Out of three vata having specific property enters the mi- nutest channels of the body. That’s why vata is said to be pow- erful one. Inspite of getting occlusion by pitta, kapha, Gma etc. vata is capable of scattering the pitta, kapha to different body parts and causes diseases by favoring dosa dusya sammurchana in occluded srotas. Vata also brings dryness in dhatus. arateiqaant pict aeicarecaa at arate 82 weet 21 ata fe qarnggateoraghm: 1 pfeil apga wan RTE atrenqravkamardisiagiag | C.Ci 28/59-60 Mainly two factors are said to be responsible for aggrava- tion of vata namely dhatuksaya (depletion of tissue elements) and mdargavarana (obstruction in channels). Vata, pitta, kapha spreaded all over the body and circulate through channels. Due to subtle nature of vata it enters the minute channels. Vata be- ing aggravated carries the remaining two dosds to different places and manifest diseases wherever it struck in occluded channels. Along with it dries up the rasadhi dhatus. Dosa 23 gnaw Az (Classification of Avarana) aratratay anit TEAS WaeTd | Innumerable varieties of Gvarana to vdyu explained. A.Ar.Ni 16/31 Totally 44 types of @varana described in Ayurveda are as follows. 1. Annyonydvarana of véta dosa. Occlusion among sub types of vata i;e 20 types. 2. Dosavrta vata—13 types. Occlusion to vata by pitta and kapha. 3. Dhatvavrta vata—-7 types. Occlusion to vata by dhatus. 4. Anna and malavrta vata-3 types. Occlussion to vata by food, urine, stool. 5. Amavrta vdta—2. Occlusion to vata by ama. 1. 20 types of Annyonyavarara vata. creat fy wenerenctearee sy fog SaeraTET EMSA WAISAT | WOT suger wat Guard Aske | SENET ST ad wa aan | Riga on arqraont aT | Area fe Get afl Weary Wea | C:Ci 28/199-201 Aggravated sub types of vata occlude mutually and re- sponsible for the manifestation of twenty varieties of annyonydvarana. Prana occludes other 4 kinds of vata and these four again occlude prana vata etc. Like this mutual oc- clusion develops two kinds of annyonyavarana. 1. Prandvrta udana vata Pranavrta samana vata Pranavrta vydna vata Pranavrta apana vata Udanavrta prana vata Vyanavrta prana vata Samanavyta prana vata Apanavrta prana vata PA AARWN
24 10. 1k. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 25. 26. 27. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 35. 37. 39. 44. 24. 28. 34. 36. 38. 40. 41. 42. 43, Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana Samanavrta udana vata Vyanavrta uddna vata Apan4Gvrta udana vata Udanavrta samana vata Vyanavrta samana vata Apanavrta samana vata Udanavrta vyana vata Samanavrta vyana vata Apanavrta vydna vata Udanavrta apana vata Samandavrta apana vata Vyanavrta apadna vata Pittavrta vata Kaphavrta vata Pittavrta prana vata Kaphavrta prana vata Pittavrta udana vata Kaphavrta udana vata Pittavrta samana vata Kaphavrta samana vata Pittavrta vydna vata Kaphavrta vyana vata~ Pittavrta apana vata Kaphavrta apana vata Kapha-pittavrta (misramavarana) vata Amavrta vata Raktavrta vata Mamsavrta vata MedasGvrta vata Asthyavrta vata Majjavrta vata Sukravrta vata Sarva dhatvavrta vata Annavria vata Miutravrta vata Varcasavria vata Dosa 25 1. WONG Sat Ait Aaa (Pranavrta Vyana Vata Laksana) wifeot_ yer ae tafser am wong fas ai aiebaeqis C.Ci_ 28/202-203 e Loss of functions of sensory organs e Loss of memory and strength. 2. AMT Walt awl (Vyanavria Prana Vata Laksana) wadiserf == eitmeiecaraie: ARTA | wt ose wa eq fates C.Ci 28/202-203 e Excessive sweating @ Horripilation. e Skin disease e Numbness in the body 3. WOT AAT Ait Haat (Pranavrta Samana Vata Laksana) wore wart episneaaqad: | agen: «89rd area TOT: 11 C.Ci 28/204-205 e Difficulty in speech e Slurring speech e Dumbness 4, TAMTat SAM Att AAT (Samanavrta Apana Vata Laksana) warargaart = eat =e aT: | ye out am det afters C.Ci 28/205-206 @ Grahani gada (diseases of grahani) e Parsva gada (diseases of sides of chest) e Hrdgada 4vVik. & Roga
26 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana (diseases of heart) © Amadsaya Sula (Pain in stomach) 5. WONT SoM Alt Mat (Pranavria Udana Vata Laksana) C.Ci 28/206-207 Stiffness in head Rhinitis Obstruction to inspiration and expiration Diseases of heart Dryness of the mouth. 6, SATA ATTA MaNl (Udanavria Prana Vata Laksana) aiiacrctat ait urgent an sera owt oto: ol yiaenitor fesermetert wa waraureae | C.Ci 28/207-208 e Loss of activities, ojas, strength and complexion. e Death. 7. SAMNGd SUT ald Ma (Udanavrta Apiina Vata Laksana) seagesum wofdarenet nar: 1 egaie wa arenfe viet targa i C.Ci 28/209-210 Chardi roga and Svasa roga (diseases of dysponea). 8. HAAG SAA AA HAV (Apandvrta Udéna Vata Laksana) Haiseistroter sektsamdad | ar weet wa dee aie aris C.Ci 28/210-211 Dosa 27 e Unconsciousness e Suppression of power of agni e Atisdra 9, AMIGA SAM Alt MAN (Vyanavrta Apana Vata Laksana) TFTEAT Tera ryearictat tas fete: I fag crmeisut a feria , , C.Ci 28/211-212 e Vomiting e Abdominal distension e Uddvarta (upward movement of vata) e e Gulma (abdominal growths) Parikartika (sawing pain in the abdomen) t 10, PAPA STA Ae MAM (Apanavria Vyana Vata Lakasna) aang a wafgrqatcear amare: oad decor wei C.Ci 28/212-213 Excessive discharge of stool, urine and semen. 11. WAST SU at MATT (Samanavrta Vyaina Vata Laksana) Yeot War Wendis FeatsTaAsit TeraTA: wart a arent wea C.Ci 28/213-214 Fainting Drowsiness Delirium General malaize Diminution of agni, ojas and bala. 12, SAMIGd SA At Hat (Udanavrta Vyana Vata Laksana) PIRTAS PUTAS Ta STEM, i srt arm ww ud fit wi C.Ci 28/214-215
28 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijiiina Stiffness Hypofunctioning of agni Loss of sweating Sedentary habits Closure of the eyes 13-20 Remaining eight varieties of annyonyavarana may -be diagnosed by following principle. TER aa gett | Aart: | wat) «owaedot |6oafrdifeatssardt = watt ae Baers cay | atest wenger ghrree 11 C.Ci 28/215-216 The mutual occlusions of remaining pranavrta apana vatadi eight varieties can be understood by their signs and symp- toms. It may be understood that these will be decrease in the functions of the occluded one (avarya) and increase in the func- tions of the occluser (Gvaraka) happens to be the general con- cept or either increased or decrease functions of occluded vata is observed. 21. ferga alt AAT (Pittévrta Vata Laksana) fay fared aeqem yet wie) aerecacireis faae: = sittenfier i C.Ci 28/61-62 Burning sensation Increased thirst Colic pain Giddiness Feeling as if entered into darkness. e Burning sensation increases after taking pungent, sour, - saline and hot substances. e Craving for cold substances. Dosa 29 2. HHT Alt AAW (Kaphavrta Vata Laksana) ver tikagenf® «= weergueritsfira agiansaaratit = Fa wana t1 - C.Ci 28/6263 Coldish sensation Heaviness— Colic pain Feeling comfortable. after consuming pungent, hot etc. e Desire for fasting, exercises, ununctuous and hot sub- stances. . 23. faa wWwtata Hat (Pittavrta Pranavata Laksana) qest uel wa: yet fae: yftcenfirar ett oui farmer ut ferns C.Ci 28/221-222 e Fainting. e Burning sensation. e Giddiness. e Colic pain. e Indigestion. e Desire for cold substances. @ Vomits undigested food. 4, BTA WTA AAW (Kupha.rta Prana Vata Laksana) amt waa eauqefeofta wil C.Ci 28/222-223 © Excessive expectoration of saliva, sneezing, eructation, obstruction to inspiration and expiration, anorexia, vomiting. 25. frarae Sart att HAN (Pittavrta Udana Vata ranean) Toten a warfer al areqra: aera: aeisivist TIESTEART face 11 C.Ci 28/223-224
30 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Fainting, burning sensation etc. Burning sensation in umbilical region and chest. Exhaustion. Loss of Ojas. General malaise. 26. Ublaad Sarat Hayat (Kaphavrta Udana Vata Laksana) arat yersrniet = aaved = arearae: | ariet Teraerefasanred 1 C.Ci 28/224-225 e Discolouration of skin. e Loss of speech and voice. @ Weakness. e Heaviness of the body. e@ Anorexia. 27. fraraa WAM alt MAM (Pittavria Samana Vata Laksana) wire at met uefta ai faa war Rargeererereitercr: it C.Ci 28/225-226 e Excessive sweating e@ Thirst . e Burining sensation, fainting e Anorexia reduction in body temperature or heat. 28. HUA VAM Alt MAT (Kaphavrta Samana Vata Laksana) aa afer «a tmetadia wz marae wa earEaT | wnfeefterar 11 C.Ci 28/226-227 e Absence of sweating © Suppression of agni © Horripilation e Excessive coldness in the body Dosa 31. 29. Trarsa aM ard RT (Pittavria Vyana Vata Laksana) cart first gf tareqe: _ Walaa: | Tara 8 UR | aaG: «= aaa: 11 C.Ci 28/227-228 @ Burning sensation all over the body. e Exhaustion. e Limited body motions along with burning sensation and - pain. 30. BBIGT SAM At MAT (Kaphavrta Vyana Vata Laksana) Tem wena waders wa: | am w@aat fag af Baers fe: C.Ci 28/228-229 ® Heaviness all over the body. e Pain in all joints and bones. e Excessive limitations of body movements. 31. fragt SUM ARM Ha (Pittavrta Apana Vata Laksana) wiftayaretedt arat yeaa: | fay famaisam waster ti C.Ci 28/229-230 e Yellowish discoloration of urine and stool. e Sensation of heat in anus and penis. e@ Excessive discharge of menstrual fluid. 32, BTAA AIH Ald Wal (Kaphavyrta Apana Vata Laksana) frangcentgeead: wat | verso, «dasa AREA: 11 C.Ci 28/230-231 e Patient passes loose watery stools, mixed with ama and kapha. © Kaphaja prameha may manifest.
32 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijitina 33. wafiragya art Mat (Kapha Pittavrta Vata Laksana) mau q fist free a amet a sree feraftegry 6 faerie C.Ci 28/231-232 e Mixed features of Kaphavrta vata and pittavrta vata observed. | 34, SUATTR area at arate Sart (Amavrta Vata or Sama Vata Laksana) we a oad wt wardfir wit: | fererantrenrerearster vitatirerta: 1 HERA aeTay afgetasrat mW ae feet og watt fawkes cs . A.Hr.Ni 16/29-30 e Stupor. e Rigidity or inactiveness. e Feeling of heaviness. '@ Unctuousness. © Loss of power of agni. @ Anorexia. e Lassitude. e Cold sensation. . © Swelling. wae © Desire for pungent, dry and gets relief by such things © Opposite to above symptoms indicate nirama state. 35, THlat art wraraT (Raktavrta Vata Laksana) TRgt «= Weletieraeaiaracsit Wer! way MT: «ogageiedt nose ai) C.Ci 28/63-64 e Excessive pain associated with burning sensation in be tween skin and muscle tissue. © Inflammatory signs and symptoms like swelling, reddishness etc. e Circular rashes over skin. Dosa 33 36. TATA Alt HAW (Mamsavrta Vata Laksana) won fermi fiser: 9 waqgere we: fiifereart aw det sa iat C.Ci 28/64-65 e Appearance of hard, discolored pimples. e Swelling e Horripilation. e Formiculation i.e. feeling as if ants are crawling inside the body. 37, ACMA Alt MAT (Medasavrta Vata Laksana) ae: ferent yg: vita: yitetsserefererar | srevart sft Fa: Hest Raatssaa: 11 . C.Ci 28/65-66 e Appearance of swelling in the body parts which is mobile, unctuous, soft and cold. e Anorexia. e It is also called @dhyavata which is very difficult to cure. 38. WRRANGA Ala MAT (Asthyavrta Vata Laksana) wasimeetssat get dist | oonfierefrs wad def a yafaite gaa C.Ci 28/66-67 e Patient likes kneading and hot application. e Breaking pain. e Depression. e Feels as if pierced by needles. 39, ATMA A MAN (Majjdvrta Vata Laksana) asiga fam: wrap oftaeaq Wet¢ term = ofiedt aaa qaqa C.Ci 28/67-68
34 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiiana e Bending. e Yawning. © Twisting or Cramps. e Patient gets relief for pain after pressing by hands. 40. UaRlad att WAT (Sukravrta Vata Laksana) Qaaisicant a ford a yi C.Ci 28/68 © Non-ejaculation or excessive ejaculation of semen. @ Sterility. 41. Va AMAA AA AA (Sarva Dhatvavrta Vata Laksana) facthh aredtstaea wea dress at Awr.Ni 16/41-42 © Pain in the pelvis, groins and back. e@ Vata moves in hepazard directions. © Disturbs the equilibrium state of dosas, dhatus, malas, agni etc. e Severe Pain in the heart. 42, Wald At AAT (Annavrta Vata Laksana) aa gat a writ wmermashai cc 23/60 e Pain in abdomen after consumption of food, gets relief for pain after the digestion of food. 43. TMT Ald MAT (Mitravrta Vata Laksana) TRInghrrear wen qaras Feit 1 C.Ci 28/69 e Retention of urine. e Distension and pain in urinary bladder. 44, TENG Aa MAG (Varcasavrta Vata Laksana) ates fifaarats a: tart oka aren a Set We SETA AT: | faq disarm ga yeh wa wd! sotdangsy easing aed: | seed get ta aderen- aise 1 C.Ci 28/70-71 Dosa 35 Severe constipation. Cutting type of pain in anorectal region. Quick digestion of unctous substances. Patients passes stool which is dry with difficulty and delay and the voiding is painful. e Gives discomfort in abdomen. e Pain in the hips, groin and back. e Upward movement of vata inside the abdomen. e Development of abnormality in the heart. eoeeoe General effects of Vata Avarana Avarya street (Avarya) C.Ci 28/215-216 (Cakrapani) If vata occluded by another powerful vata, then the oc- cluded one i:e dvarya loses it functions. sate (Avaraka) ere gf wadakedait | C.Ci 28/215-216 (Cakrapani) Avaraka is one which occludes the other and there will be increase in its functions. It is also accepted that if d@varya is stronger than @varaka then increased symptoms of aGvarya is observed and vice versa. C.Ci. 28/215-216 (Cakrapani) wat yiofirat st aerate a whee ouyaha «fie: «=| wera: | wrt: densities ara Fl eas ats ufiqn: ufteacerTeda | SOATTTTEAT: eae Zar: | C.Ci 28/233-235
36 ’ Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijifidna e Obstruction to prana vata and udana vata by kapha and pitta develops serious fatal condition because life is de- pendent on prana vata and strength is dependent on udana vata. Therefore, these occlusions leads to reduc- tion of logevity and strength. © If physician diagnose the disease incorrectly or symp- toms persist for more than one year or if neglected or if managed improperly leading to incurability of the dis- ease. AENIT SAA (Complications due to Avarana) wart feat: witet yeisfreme wa at : C.Ci 28/236-238 If avarana condition is neglected leading to development of serious diseases like diseases of heart, abscess, splenic ab- normality, abdominal growths, diarrhoea. That’s why proper assessment and examination of occlusions of five types vata by other kinds of vata, pitta, kapha etc. required. are ufa (Dosa gati) | Dosa gati is a condition characterized by variation in the Sites of dosas depending on the unequilibrium and equilibrium State of dosas. Equilibrium state of dosas refers to dosas are . present in. their own site and performing normal functions Unequilibrium state of dosas is a condition, which devel due to hypo or hyper state of dosas. , “Pe aa: wart a ghey seri fate ate: 1 ae ae frfaensar 1 Bian = aon vrenmifererarg | seer faeraea | aterott fem: Dosa 37 firétat ae weg mBIrersanTeneg | C.Su 17/112-114 Dosas attain abatement, normalcy and exaggeration state depending on exposure to various factors. Aggravated dosas manifest upward, downward and oblique movement inside the body and manifest condition like vomiting, epistaxis, diarrhoea etc.. Agitated and excacerbated dosa moves to kostha (gastro intestinal tract), §akha (extremities) and marmasthi sandhi (vi- tal organs and joints). Accumulation, agitation and pacification of dosa in respec- tive seasons is a natural phenomenon and doesn’t manifest dis- eases. But on the contrary if it attains 6 stages of vyadhi kriyakala then only disease manifests. TACATGT amet atardtat ss rerraifct: wa anne: arava gqfaya gagke saa 1 quateneeanraht agaists Beta, adt arfertanrg, | waa: a Ww waa wal wart WHAT , afara-aetrara: | C.Su 17/112-114 (Gangadhara) - Including svastha and dtura 3 types of movements are described for vatadi dosa. In patients 3 kinds of gati are de- scribed namely ksaya-vrddhi (hypo-hyper) state of dosas. Nor- mal state of dosds does not come under patient. Ksaya state refers to depletion or diminished state of dosa, but it doesn’t destroy the body. Sthana means normal state of the dosa. Vrddhi means exaggeration or excacerbation of dosas. Nidana (Etiological factors) The following etiological factors are described for the movement of dosa from kostha to $akha and vice versa.
38 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Movement of Dosa from Kostha to Sakha SATA OUT aU a ek TAT EAOTT, 1 atsrera wet aa Srararedea wreeaya fared af adifte: | wevraet «start ph ardifat: 1 cosy 28/31-32 Dosds move from kostha to sakha by following etiologi- cal agents. e Excessive exercise e Excess heat or increased warmthness e Intake of penetrating foods & drinks © Consumption and adoptation of unwholesome food and activities e Power of vata with pressure to expels the dosds from kostha to §akha In the absence of exciting cause, these vitiated dosa at times remain in quiscent stage until they are exposed to favour- able time and place. These vitiated dosa may manifest their effects after getting suitable time and place. However, strongly aggravated dosdas do not remain in quiscent stage but manifest their effects immediately. Movement of Dosas from Sakha to Kostha FReeT FrOSATL Urea SNAPS EARL PRET Waa HET: wis abt arate Frerend C.Su 28/33 Dosa moves from §akha to kostha by following process— e Excacerbation of dosas. © Liquification of pathogenetic factors e@ Suppuration e Cleansing of srotasas © Control over vata dosa agen: sisrarsriera: (Dosa Dusyayg ASrayaSrayi Bhava) ware fearit arg: | Trt gy ae teret: 1 Dosa 39 vert |g, | Tee fre: weera evar ai atari afeonrenittd, ome gfafé = atom vaoTspIM AeA detaeditgadang ATAIS PTS PATET aeaaerrgnary | fray Wea HAKGATETT: | A.A.Su 11/26-28 There is a relationship between dosa and dhatu as a Gsrayi (content) and a@fraya (container) respectively are as fol- lows— Asrayi (Resident) Asraya (Residence) Rasa, mamsa, meda, There is a neccessity to understand this concept while plan- ning therapy because the medicines or therapeutic procedures which increase or decrease the @Srayi, also increases or de- creases respective GSraya except in case of asthi and vata. majja, sukra, mitra purisa For example. Vata aggravates by ruksa (rough), tikta (bitter), katu (pun- gent), kasdya (astringent), :apatarpan (mal-nourishment), langhana (fasting) but the same factors decreases asthi. Asthi aggravates by snigdha (unctous or oleation therapy), madhura (sweat), dmla (sour), lavana (salt), brmhana (nour- ishment therapy) but these factors alleviates vata.
Chapter 2 alwag WTA (Dosavaha Srotas) waeargqartrt eaiaifa aafaftsa: | C.Ci 28/8 Samana vata resides in svedavaha, dosavaha and ambuvaha srotas. aaa a oaiife aderiveaaa | C.Ci 28/8 (Cakrapani) Dosavaha srotas circulate all over the body. araktreryersront ot: Teena Tatler Sareea C.Vi 5/6 Vata, pitta and kapha circulate all over the body through minute and macro channels of ‘the body. In this connection Sugruta has mentioned vadtavaha, pittavaha, kaphavaha and raktavaha sira. : S.Sa 7/6 vossseee ERMINE aT! -C.Su 12/7 Vata creates minute and macro channels during embryogen- esis. aITaE BAH, (Vatavaha Srotas) aren arctenferat Set | 8.Sa. 7/6 Totally 40 mula sira (main blood vessels) are described. Vatavahini sira are ten in number, these carries vata. Yer (Root)— 5.8, 7/6 Vatavaha srotas originate from vatasthana. Main ten branches divide into 175 sub branches. Structure of Vatavaha Srotas wart = atdaet: «ete fe: S.S8a. 7/18 Dosavaha Srotas Al Vatavaha srotas are red in colour and always full of vata. antag Great afe wea a (Vatavaha Sroto Dusti Prakopa Hetu) or SATE BI (Vataprakopa Hetu) Dosa Sajicaya Hetu wa ata sere toes 7a srayeriegnratin it C.Vi 1/6 3 Rasds accumulates the dosas and 3 Rasas (Madhura, amla & lavana) subsides the dosa they are as follows— Vata Saiicaya Hetu wg itRenaren alt Set | C.Vi. 1/6 Pungent, bitter and astringent taste of food accumulates vata. ER Tee TATA A TMAA- WHS ANAC CREA - TALUT- TASINTLUT- ATLETOT- WaT - TTT - T= Tearherereat HSAHUTALATH - BA- Y- Pieces - BES MH ~ AC LEAH TTS - HILGT yarranttanr- “RRTa Beyser- Froraryn- fees eo I S.Su 21/19 Vata become agitated by following causative factors : _@ Weak person fighting with strong person or indulging in Fetal: Teang Fare: | e Performing heavy exercises, indulging in more sexual acts, continuous study. e Falling down from certain height. e Running or speed walk. e Excessive Strain/Sprain to the body. e ara este yer: | Injury due to fighting 5 Vik. & Roga
42 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiiana © amd Tan Tagen Jumping to a downward deep surface is called lafgana. e Sinking in water (hopping) © Swimming in water e Not sleeping during night time. e Carrying heavy loads e Excessive travelling on elephant, horse, chariot and by foot. « Increased intake of pungent, astringent, bitter, rough, light, cold, dried vegetables. © deck YER AT (Vallur means dry meat) o Re: aufear Hearsay: | Varaka is kind of bilobed cereals. © Stier BWA SHEE: (Uddalaka is aranya kodrava). © Syamaka : ° fran: seaftat, aera Tay safer | e Green gram e Lentil : . sreai-qat— Adaki means tuvari e Bu-ade Hers Harenu is vartula kalaya e An: fiyca:— Kalaya is trputaka o feqaa—waeiita:— Nispavaka is rajasimbi © SAM BCT STATA | (Dalhana) Anasana means less intake of food and fasting. © fas aearcurre FL! (Dalhana) - Visamasana means intake of large amount of food or less amount of food in irregular time. © sear asiteh sts | (Dalhana) AdhyaSana means eating during indigestion. e Suppression of urges like flatus, urine, stool, semen, vomiting, sneezing, eructation, lachrymation etc. Dosavaha Srotas 43 By above nidana vata become agitated. a visa gart oa fagtua: 1 wagers «aise oa onmpefti «6 s.su 21/720 e Vayu aggravates during cold season and exposure to cold. e ay Aulyelaa are yard yates ad ae During cloudy weather, forceful wind. ~ oe wie asta During rainy season e During early morning, afternoon and after the digestion of food.. _ atae anit as WMA (Vatavaha Sroto Dusti Laksana) wuisrawurts| C. Su. 12/8 Abnormal vata performs various afflictions to the body, there by it produces various diseases. {It also affects the strength, complexion, happiness and longevity. It disturbs the functions of mind, afflicts all sense faculties, deforms and destroy the embryo for long. As a result it gives rise to fear, grief, confu- sion, anxiety and excessive delirium and finally stops.the vital breath. . Aas Alet Efe aI (Vatavaha Sroto Dusti Vikira) alast ArTeast FEAT (80 types of vataja nanatmaja vikiira) faaag NTT (Pittavaha Srotas) © : Yet (Root)— S.5& 7/6
44 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Pittavaha srotas have their root in pittasthana and 10 major blood vessels carry pitta and these 10 subdivided into 175 mi- nor branches, frrgenss sera | S.Sa 7/18 Pittavaha srotas are warm.and blue in colour. firage att afe Weta aq (Pittavaha Sroto Dusti Prakopa Hetu) or fa went Er (Pittaprakopa Hetu) wile vite sas sereara- frara- Age - He - ge - Pret. ateniton- wr feerfe- Ferereter- ferwerre - eee wefarerett aqu-Rrerereret- wear- crafter: _fir_ serene’ 1S.Su 21/20 Pitta aggravates due to, the following etiological factors. _ @ Anger, Anxiety, Fear area: ethdtst (Dalhana)— Aydsa means various kinds of pain and discomfort to the body. fare faate:, Fa viene aa: | (Dalhana) Vidagdha means burning sensation, which manifests swell- ing, redness etc. faatfeft seria ae Ton waiters Hear creaeTEs eT afgarfe ! (Dalhana) Vidaha means sour eructations, burning sensation, thirst along with difficulty in digestion. Sexual intercourse. Excess consumption of pungent, sour, salty, irritant, hot, light and burning food substances. Excess in take of sesamum oil, oil cake, horse gram, mus- tard, linseeds. Seren SRM TEMG IT | (Dalhana) Dosavaha Srotas 45 Green. vegetables like kuthera, Sigru, surasa, sumukha, Gsuri, bhiustrna etc. : Increased intake of pot herbs, fish, meat of goat, sheep. af aweté vet afer | (Dathana) Cow’s curd with fat. Butter milk. apfetent fernfert WwmA | (Dalhana) kurchika means properly ' churned butter milk. RY afreq— Mastu means curd water. thie fepraiigafeedt dart arms ar (Dalhana) Sauviraka means fermented substance forms after mixing nistusa, yava, trvrta. Various wine preparations. airernenta srranart 1 (Dalhana) Sour fruits like Gmrataka etc. ; weariafa arete eft 1 (Dalhana) Fatless curd. Pitta Aggravating Factors aie wat wt arr a faye: | maa ome oa ote a graft) S.Su 21/22 soitftfe sorana anifeeay | (Dathana) Usna means working in heat zones. During Summer (grisma rtu) ward wee During Sarad rtu (Autumn season)(Dalhana) Afternoon Midnight During digestion of food.
- 46 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Pitta. Saficaya Hetu me BEA Hao: fied waake | C.Vi. 6 Pungent, sour and salty taste dominated food accumulates pitta, During varsda rtu fewag ate eff Ma (Pittavaha Sroto Dusti Laksana) safrate ree fearerta: attain: yarn ate; ween mle ed até werehrterndths emerartir warts 11. su. 12/11 Agni is represented by pitta in the body and produces good or bad effects depending on its normal or abnormal state, i.e. digestion or indigestion, vision or loss of vision, normal or ab- normal] temperature, normal or abnormal complexion, valour and fear, anger and joy, confusion and clarity and other dual functions. . Taree aii gf faa (Pittavaha Sroto Dusti Vikara) ferast ATCT FAHTT (40 types of Pittaja nanitmaja vikéra) Snag Bite (Kaphavaha Srotas) Yet (Root)— OR or ee seeeccees ROMA Bees S.8a 7/6 Kaphavaha srotas have their root in kapha sthana and these are circulating in 10 major blood vessles and again 10 major blood vessels subdivided into 175 minor branches. vitor wits: feert: aT | Kaphavaha srotas are cold, white and stable. S.$& 7/18 Dosavaha Srotas 47 wag Bll we wala Fy (Kaphavaha Sroto Dusti Prakopa Hetu) or BRAT Ls (Kaphaprakopa Hetu) (CaRAHISIRIeE Ire cant Site Ferre Ts acrrears ererrn Gees a ene ATE TeTeTE The ferer- fae fate eel ET PENT UTAH AeA TAM PONT TH ISH ATT aeeil wet BATTEaRTA WAH: Ver WeRTATTEMt | S.Su 21/23 Kapha aggravating etiological factors are as follows— e Sleeping during day time e Sitting idle or not doing any physical exercises e Lassitude : e Excess consumption of sweet, sour, salt, cold, tactons. heavy, shiny food. . aifterte da ang Ae. ‘etirerraferera wate wrheat 1 t 4° _ _(Dathana) Abhisyandi means which increase kledata (moistureness) in dosa, dhatu, mala and srotas. Excess intake of ayanaka, yavaka, naisadha, itkata, masa, mahdmasa, godhuma, tila, pista vikrti, dadhi, dugdha, krsara (kind of yavagu), payasa, iksuvikara (sugarcane and_.its prod- ucts). ® Consumption of marshy and aquatic animals meat. ‘e Intake of Jotus i.e. its fat, stem and stalk, kaseruka, srigataka. e Excess consumption of sweet fruits like tala, nGrikela ~ etc. e Consumption of cucurbitaceous fruits like kiismanda etc. Intake of mixture of healthy and unhealthy diet. Eating during indigestion and other kapha aggravating factors.
48 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiiana 8 eit: vite @ aaa a fase: gaié a watt ow qua yarafr S.Su 21/25 Excess intake of cold substances, during winter, especially in vasanta, first hours of morning, (Jafé 394 yet), night and just after taking food. wwe WHT Bq (Kapha Saficaya Hetu) AQT Set TaN: yeaa aaah | C.Vi. 1/6 Sweet, sour, salty taste dominated food accumulates kapha. “ During SiSira rtu manag art afe AAW (Kaphavaha Sroto Dusti Laksana) © earerTfeT SRT 1 " C. Su. 12/12 Soma which is represented by kapha and gives rise to good or bad effects depending on its normalcy and abnormalcy i.e. ~ firmness and Jaxity, plumpness and emaciation, enthusiasm and laziness, potency and impotency, knowledge and ignorance, understanding and confusion and such other dual functions. HHA Stat afe faa (Kaphavaha Sroto Dusti Vikara) RT ATT faar (20 types of Kaphaja nandtmaja vikara) adage aaa (Sarvavaha Srotas) a fe ant faa: anfsa fint Sasi wr Fe at ae ata: adaer: yea: | S.S@ 7/16 Sarvavaha srotas (sira) are those in which all the dosa i.e. ‘vata, pitta and kapha circulates. Dosavaha Srotas 49 qari: welaer: ey: | ; S.S@ 7/17 Aggravated dosa intimately mixed with one another and circulating inside are sure to over run their usual seats since these carry all the dosa. ude aid afe faeatt (Sarvevaha Sroto Dusti Vikara) All sa@manyaja vikdra.
Chapter 3 aq (Dhatu) Weed ag wl (Prakrta Dhatu Karma (Functions of normal tissues)] : 1 \ | te: | i wdacersticaret: WHT! 4.5.Su 19/20 4, aie wihge Acagy, Fa: Geddl ged ules a, archi Searles: YS @, HoT As ae ERE yor a wah Wat lg (Sapta Dhatu) Total seven dhatu mentioned in the texts i.e. rasa dhatu, rakta dhatu, mamsa dhatu, medo dhatu, asthi dhatu, majja dhatu and Sukra dhdtu. All the above seven dhdtu supports and nour- ishes the body. Functions of each dhatu attributed are as fol- lows— S. Su 15/5 Rasa dhatu-It provides sense of satisfaction, nourishment and supplies nourishment to raktadhatu. Rakta dhatu-it bestows colour, sustains life activities and supplies nourishment to madmsa dhatu. Mamsa dhatu-It covers the body and nourishes the body, waste products and meda dhatu. Meda dhatu-It bestows moistness in the eyes and other body parts, lubrication, stability and nourishment to asthi dhatu. Dhatu 51. Asthi dhatu-It support the body, helps for posture and nourishment to majja dhatu. Majja dhatu-It provides lubrication, strength, fills the cavi- _ ties of bone gives nourishment to gukra dhatu. Sukra dhatu-It bestows courage, ejaculation, lust, strength, pleasure, love, happiness and production of foetus. Sq (Upadhatu) ATRa et: We a Aga: TM Gera: 1 C. Ci 15/17 aan uftanitar | dln honreaslasrya Terry Flt agar Far Wa TaNTEa: | S. Sa 5/16-17 (Prathama khanda) The seven upadhdtu are produced by the dhatu during metabolism are as follows. Stanya (breast milk), rajas (menstrual fluid) appear and disappear according to age 2..Rakta dhatue Kandara (tendons) and sira . (blood vessels) 3. Mamsa dhatu vasa (fatty material), sattvaca (six layers of skin) 1. Rasa dhdtu 4. Meda dhatu Snayu (ligaments) and sandhi (joints), sveda (sweating) 4 5. Asthi dhatu Danta (teeth): . 6. Majja dhatu KeSa (hairs) .
52 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana mT aa (Causative Factors for the Increase of Dhitus) Oa: EY week: war: warTgorafasais senfagitverca anftfircaditee’ | wemeaheal geteis fr gra camara wt ret wes Fat Ages fer TSCA ASH Aa Ys Yar afot Ti: | Oa ad eran amras arraaarnentaencorrenfedt war, afafeart arererecormyred ferme yiirengeaeTEt BROT | TA AAU YS MATTE ETO ATT: TAF A. S. Su 19/09 Enhancement of dhdtu takes place by the use of foods and activities which are similar materially or which possess similar properties predominantly or decrease of dkGtu results opposite to above theory. The dh@tu which are heavy undergo increase by substances which possess the property of heaviness and those which cause union or compactness and decrease by those which cause separation. That’s why inspite of many other substances, rakta undergoes increase especially by the use of blood as food, ‘mamsa by the consumption of meat (fatty foods), asthi by the usage of cartilages as food, majja by the use of marrow as food, Sukra by the use of seminal fluid, garbha (foetus) by the use of egg as food. -. The substances having similar qualities, which could be used as food or activities may not be present near by or those which are present near by may not be suitable to be used as food, being either antagonistic causing aversion, tastelessness or due to any other reason. In such circumstances, it is best to make use of substances of similar properties derived from dif- ferent species possessing identical qualities predominatly. emqafs Mat Dhatuvrddhi Laksana If dhGtu aggravates or become excess develops following - symptoms are as follows— Dhatu 53 THAN Bex AAT [Rasadhatu Vrddhi Laksasna (Symptoms of excacerbated rasa dhatu)] Tistigal gered wae AaTaalet | S. Su 15/14 WMarlaaneareageciaManeRageny rates Feet A. S. Su 19/4 ‘faenrce: Ta: | Praseka-salivation Arocaka—anorexia _ Asya vairasya—bad taste in mouth Hrllasa—nausea Srotorodha—obstruction in channels Svadu dvesa~aversion towards sweet products Afigamarda—general malaise Hrdayotkleda—oppression in the heart Slesma vikara-other symptoms of increased kapha. THAT Bhs MAN (Raktadhatu Vrddhi Laksana (Symptoms of aggravated rakta dhatu)] we Toe Ferret = ' S. Su 15/14 ster serrate rene RroaerreM ETE 1 A. S. Su 19/4 e Kustha—dermatological disorders including leprosy e Visarpa—herpes infections e Pitakd-skin eruptions like boils, pustules etc. e@ Asrgdara—menorthagia e Aksi, mukha, medhra, guda daha—burning sensation in eyes, mouth, urethra & rectum ‘Gulma—abdominal growths Vidradhi—abscesses Pliha-splenic disorders Vyanga—discolouration of skin Kamala~jaundice Agni naga—loss of digestive fire Tamah praveSa~darkness infront of eyes
34 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Raktanga netraté—reddish discolouration in the eyes Vata rakta-metabolic joint disorders Pitta vikara~symptoms of increased pitta Sira purnatvam-fullness of blood vessels Rakta pitta~bleeding disorders aaa afeg AT ([Mamsadhiatu Vrddhi Laksana (Symptoms of aggravated mamsa dhatu)] S. Su 15/14 wgrinagheta: yetormitant was wet As. Su 19/4 Galaganda—enlargement of glands in neck Gandamala—enlargement of glands in scrofula Arbuda—malignant tumours Granthi-benign growths Talu jikva kantha roga—diseases of palate, tongue & throat © Sphig galoustha bahi udaroru jangha gaurava vrddhi- produces heaviness and increase in size of the buttocks, neck, lips, arms, abdomen, chest and thighs. e Slesma vikara and rakta vikéra (Symptoms of increased Slesma and rakta) © Guru gdtraté—heaviness in body AeemMg aex MAM /Medadhatu Vrddhi Laksana (Symptoms of aggravated meda dhatu)] Ae: ferenpaqeradahs wrraae thie a 1 S. Su 15/14 , A. S. Su 19/4 e Prameha Purvarupa—premonitory symptoms of prameha © Sthaulya-obesity ¢ Sthaulyopadrava—complications of obesity Dhatu 55. e Slesma rakta mamsa vikdra-Symptoms of aggravated Slesma, rakta and mamsa Snigdhafigata—unctousness of the body . : Udara pariva vyddhi-increase of the abdomen and flank: Kasa~cough S$vasa—breathing disorders Daurgandhya—bad smell emits from the body afeaeng as AA (Asthi Dhatuvrddhi Laksana ( Symptoms of aggravated asthi dhatu)] WRATMAM | S. Su 15/14 aeattaharfaetentes | A. 'S. Su 19/4 e Adhyasthi-extra bones e Adhi danta-cxtra teeth — ASMA Be MAT (Majjadhatu Vrddhi Laksana (Symptoms of aggravated majja dhatu)] . TET Talgenia & | S. Su 15/14 | Frg-raia: addy a wyenyenetitive 1 A. S. Su 19/4 e Netrafiga rakta gaurava—heaviness in eyes, body and blood ee e Parvasu ca sthula—swelling in joints e Miularubhi—appearance of small ulcers over skin Yang ales, mam (Sukradhatu Vrddhi Laksaya (Symptoms of aggravated Sukra] : Ue UpTeiahingaia a 1 S. Su 15/14 Sra EAT ATTA | A. S. Su 19/4 e Ati §tri kamata—great desire for sexual intercourse e Sukras$mari—-development of stone in the seminal tract ; ; e Sukrati pradurbhava—excess production of Sukra
56 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfi'ana & Roga Vijfiana- QIGaa Mast (Dhatuksaya Laksana) Tae TT AAMT (Rasadhatu Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished rasa dhatu)] wea | areata raereterenft THT IC. Su 17/63 wate Ta: 1 A. S. Su 19/6 THe EAST ST: WRIT IM TI S. Su 15/9 Sabdasahatva-inability to withstand noise Hrdaya drava-tachycardia Kampa-—tremors Sosa—emaciation Sitla—pain Siinyata—emptiness in organs espescially heart Spandana-throbbing pulsations Ghattana-friction Alpayapi ca cestayasrama—exhaustion with little activity Tarsa-feeling of fear Artpida—pain in chest Trsna-thirst THAT AT HAV (Raktadhatu Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of depleted rakta dhatu)] TOR Vplea TAT IA THAT | C. Su 17/64 A. S. Su 19/6 vifiraara ragurecrnereiametan ferstaes = S. Su 15/9 © Tvak ruksata—dryness in skin © Tvak parusya-roughness in skin e Amla Sitabhilasa—desire for sour and cold things © SiraSaithilya—looseness of veins or collapse of veins Dhatu 57 e Mlana-\oss of complexion Aree Oe MAW [Mamsadhatu Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of decreased mamsa dhatu)] C. Su 17/65-72 A. S. Su 19/6 nae fermisinwivay: wenfifteatarctargpenat Dead teat vet earistaes a 1 S. Su 15/9 e Sphik, gandadi Suskaté—wasting of buttocks, cheeks & other parts Toda—pain Rauksyaksa—dryness in eyes Glani-debility in sense organs Sandhi sphotana—cracking sound in the joints Dhamani Saithilya—collapse of blood vessels Sphik gondaustopasthori vaksah kaksa pindikodara griva suskata—wasting of buttocks, cheeks, lips, penis, thigs, chest, axilla, calves, abdomen and neck e Gatra sadana—debility Reng eat AAT [Meda Dhatuksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished meda dhatu)] mam «Aafa afte) aqet detest all C. Su 17/66 - 7 anfen— dafserimste: | A. S. Su 19/6 Raed wiefiais: areargpac tet Aerator a 1 S. Su 15/9 e Pltha vrddhi-enlargement of spleen e Kati svapa-loss of sensation in waist \ . 6Vik-& Roga
58 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiina & Roga Vijfiana : Sandhi Sunyata~emptiness in joints Afiga rauksya-roughness in body KarSya~emaciation Ayasa—exhaustion Srama-fatigue ; Tanutva udara—thinness of abdomen Sosa—depletion of dhatus or tuberculosis Meduramamsabhilasa—desire for fatty meat Mamsa ksaya laksana—other mamsa ksaya symptoms Sandhi sphutana-cracking noise in joints Glaniraksno—lassitude in the eyes aang Bat HAN (Asthidhatu Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished asthi dhatu )] C. Su 17/67 fered ceer A. S. Su 19/6 aftwerisfeaget aarraugt tet a S. Su 15/9 e Danta nakha bhaftga—breaking of teeth & nails e Danta nakha roma kesa Sdtana—falling of teeth, nails arid body hairs © Rauksya-roughness © Parusya—dryness ¢ Sandhi Saithilya-looseness in joints © Asthi toda (sula)—-pain in bones e Asthi baddha mamsabhilasa—Craving for meat attached to bones for consumption WSsTAT art MAW [Majjadhatu Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished majja dhatu)] vit ga are olen wg a1 fred fate combat at ysRy Dhatu 59 wed aretifit aft wef afar “ C. Su 17/68 sieititreteddrayrtayhisan tA. S. Su 19/6 TERS capa Ua Aals hearreites agp S| S. Su 15/9 Asthi sausirya—hollowness in bones Asthi nistoda—pain in bodies Daurbalya—debility Bhrama-giddiness . Tamo darsana-feeling of darkness in front of eyes Alpa sukrata—less quantity of semen Parva bheda--pain in joints | Siryanta—thinness of bones Asthini durbalani laghuni—weakness and lightness in bones ; ; © Pratatam vata rogi-suffers from vatavyadhi always | Wma Aa aT [Sukradhatu Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of aggravated Sukra dhatu)] aed yastes uvge wat om: 1 aera Yetieenig aftvrggper wa C. Su 17/69 a A. S. Su 19/6 Umat Aggqudeis rinse fare was: Wash area eRe | S. Su 15/9 Srama—exhaustion Daurbalya-—debility © Asyasosa—dryness in mouth Timira darsana—feeling of darkness in front of the eyes Afiga marda—body aches Pdnduta-pallor or anaemia Sadana-—poor digestion Klaibya—impotency
60 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana e Muskatoda—pain in the scroatum e Medhra dhumayana-~feeling as if hot fumes emitted from the path of urethra -e@ Cirascha nisekena~delayed ejaculation Sarakta nisekena—ejaculation mixed with blood Medhra ‘vrsana vedara—pain in penis & testis ASaktimaithune~-unable to perform intercourse Sukra avisarga—non ejaculation of semen sang wetast Tank (Upadhatu Pradosaja Vikara) erat firravsceal ger: freak ama) aera waccita- arerepcoraitaha: 1 C.Su 28/21 When abnormal dosa enter upadhGtu i.e. stanya, Grtava, sira, kandara, vasG, tvak, snadyu manifest stiffness, contraction, neuralgia of the extremities, new growths, throbbing sensation and numbness. 1. Diseases of stanya and artava are discussed in srotas chapter. 2. Diseases of sira are paksaghata, siragraha, avabahuka and other pittaja vikara. 3. Diseases of kandara (tendons) are sandhivata, Gmavata, vatarakta, viSvaci, khaiija etc. 4. Diseases of vasa (muscle fat) are prameha, kustha etc. 5. Diseases of tvak (skin) are kustha, pandu, kamala, visarpa, vatarakta etc. 6. Diseases of snayu (ligaments) are paksaghata, sandhivata, Gmavata, vatarakta etc. 7. Diseases of.ojas are hataujasa jvara, ojonirodhaja jvara, - madhumeha etc. * Chapter 4 We (Mala) fegraca favga, Tat q watsa: | fed, Ataea ue, Ae: War Aaa: 11 waltnd tagcat, ag: Creisfarae eet werefs 89 | eit. Utenteafaereda: 11 rR a OTT C. Ci 15/18-20 wa: ft vet: Gq weal Taw a Petsfratagmaist aga wag At: | A. S. $a 6/39 It is called mala because it is having a tendency to vitiate others. Consumed food as well as dhatus manifest malas dur- ing the process of digestion & metabolism are as follows— | cs 4. Mamsa dhatu Khamala (Excreta from external : channels) 5. Meda dhatu Sveda (Sweat) 6. Asthi dhatu Kesa loma (Hairs in the head & ; body), nakha (Nails) 7. Majja dhatu Snehamsa in aksi, vit & tvaca (lubricating material in the eyes, feacal matter & skin)
62 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiina Functions of mala are as follows~ We ant [Purisa Karma (Functions of normal stool)] qtequert arafiaerci a | S$. Su 15/5 TaASMTCIAT MTT: VT | A. S. Su 19/20 Purisa provides sirength and supports vayu, agni and pitta. qa wat (Mi itra Karma (Functions of normal urine) i aferqnereer ae | srieete Fafenta yay 1 e Fills the urinary bladder e Eliminates the excess moisture in food S. Su 15/5 A. S. Su 19/20 we wd: Sveda Karma (Functions of normal sweat)] ae: areerQuigantad | wea Sethe: Be shir 1 e Provides moistness and softness to skin e@ Supports hair qisafs UAW (Purisavrddhi Laksana (Symptoms of stool if accumulates in excess)] athrretd ait yet a | e Kuksisula~pain in abdomen © Atopa—gurgling noise in abdomen ©@ Gaurava—heaviness in abdomen Wags TIUT [Miitravrddhi Laksana (, Symptoms of aggravated urine)] at Wa ates quae waft aftadanend = S. Su 15/15 © Basti toda—pain in urinary bladder ° Adhmana-enlargement of urinary bladder © Mitra vrddhi-increase in quantity of urine S. Su 15/5 A. S. Su 19/20 S. Su 15/15 Mala 63 © Muhurmuhu pravrtti-~frequent micturation weaagts MAAaVy ([Svedavrddhi Laksana (Symptoms of . aggravated sweat)] Bawaet dhe weg Te S. Su 15/15 © Sveda vrddhi-excessive perspiration ; e Tvaca daurgandhya—bad smell from the skin e Kandu-itching . qe aa AAW (Purisa Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished stool)] ; ait venfa arenin dizafza urea: sae | phat farehpet meer A C. Su 17/70 - WERT aa: Halt tebped wa waters wsige- ASAT AT VHA 1 A. S. Su 19/6 gina exaust ares o armed Halt cercai S| S. Su 15/11 e SaSabdasya vayoh kuksau tiryagurdvam ca bhramana- movement of flatus associated with sound and moves in down- ward directions, hepazard & upward directions. _@ Antra vestana—twisting of intestines e Parsvahrdaya pida—pain it. the flanks and heart © Alpataya ca Sakrt—quantity of the stool is less Wa 4 AAT (Mittra Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished urine)] Wat wee weaardtae FI fron ert art GS a afte tC. Su 17/71 aiarreieqasivagirafaaciqaaniatt: eR TATAT AT A | ‘ A. S. Su 19/6 Trad aferidiscrpm a; sort wentbrataettoat: | 8. Su 15/11
64 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Pipasa-thirst Basti nistoda—pain in the urinary bladder Mukha sosa—dryness in mouth © Krichralpa vivarna mitratadibhi-discoloured urine comes out with difficulty in little quantity. @ Sa rudhira mutratayé—urine comes out mixed with blood eae at MAT /Sveda Ksaya Laksana (Symptoms of diminished sveda)} ese reg UT reer ea fe ARaTAUT RETA: We: | A. S. Su 19/6 Taaaa MERA aR: Taea TS ATA; WATRAG 17 S. Su 15/11 - Stabdha romakiupata-stiffness of hair follicles Roma cyavana-falling of hairs Tvak paripatana—cracking in skin Tvak svapa-loss of sensation Tvak pdrusya—toughness in skin Sveda naSa—scanty perspiration ‘werent orm year a get a fagentit a med aed were i C. Su 17/72 The signs and symptoms of other varieties of mala (khamala, keSa, loma, nakha, snehamsa in aksi, vit and tvaca etc.) are as follows— e Dryness in excretory organs e Feelings of emptiness e Lightness Jatukarna described 18. types of ksaya (diminutions). Wet watast faeRt (Mala Pradosaja Vikara) Termite pita te vie weqoTy | ae Ae Sta asieadta a 1 — C.Su 28/22 Mala 65 When agitated dosa come in contact with mala produce breaking up of waste products, drying up of the waste sub- stances, become vitiated by changing normal colour & consis- tency. Excessive retention of waste substances or excessive elimination of waste products. All the above phenomena indi- cates the development of vitiation in waste products as a result disease manifests in respective vitiations. For example : If vi- tiation manifest in stool, develops disorders related to stool ab- normality.. Diseases manifest due to vitiation of waste product by vitiated dosda are as follows. e Diseases of urine Prameha, mittraghata, muttrakrcchra, asmari etc. e Diseases of stool Atisara, grahani roga, pravahika, alasaka, visucika, vistambhi etc. e Diseases of rasadhatumalarupi kapha Ksayaja kasa, rajayaksma etc. e Diseases of raktadhatumalarupi pitta Pandu, rakta pitta, kamala etc. e Diseases of mamsadhatumalarupi khamala Ear, eye, nose, mouth & genital organ disorders. e Medadhatugata malarupi sveda Jvara, udara, kustha, prameha etc. e Asthidha@tugata malarupi keséa and loma Khdlitya, p4litya etc. e Majjadhatugata malarupi sneha Diseases of eyes, stool and skin. e Sukradhatugata malarupi ojovikrti Ojoksaya, ojovyapat, ojovisramsa, grahant dosa etc. faa wetast feat (Indriya Pradosaja Vikara) shaarfin cenfsrea wepeata Gat AT: | soma 9 atetadiifaenfit a1 C.Su 28/20 When vitiated dosas enters the sense organs manifest par- tial or complete deformity in respective organs.
66 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijitana & Roga Vijfiana Diseases of hearing, vision etc. discussed in detail else- where in this book. Abnormal dosa brings abnormality in sense organs by manifesting symptoms like emptiness, lightness and dryness in respective sense organs. It is all due to their diminution. yerneadaaniataent strata: | - CS& 1/126 Three types of unwholesome contact i.e. over utilisation, non utilization and improper utilization of senses with their re- spective objects leading to aggravation of dosa, sercattic ageners aft wera | C.Sa 1/127 A substance which is not conducive to body physiology is called asdtmya or unwholesome. aararara Sart C.S& 11/127 (Cakrapani) Which causes discomfort or miseries is called asatmya. Preaftdreaitet at enfireasrad vreardtat a fagen anta- teary aa: 1 C.S@ 1/128 Disease ‘Endriyaka’ manifest due to wrong utilization, excessive utilization and non utilization of sense faculties like Sabdadi five sense organs. ubsae sft sfxagrye: | C.S& 1/128 (Cakrapani) Disease Endriyaka manifest due to impairment of sense organs. - SearagIIPTRaAa Raa: TIM: | , ©-8a 1/129 Unwholesome contact with sense organs leading to gen- esis of miseries. Chapter 5 amt (Agni) amrere Brat BePoreeTa TUT C. Su 5783 Power or condition of agni determines the quantity of food to be consumed. TSTTARAT Yours THA Ata, Teer Afzeh sam, Ternfaacraiaut warn, steahaaeiaait area 1 : C. Su 5/3 (Gangadhar) Jatharagni is of 3 kinds based on power of digestion ie. uttama ‘(superior), madhyama (moderate) and avara (inferior) power of agni and accordingly it digest the food. a adaas adder a aeanita: serfeafagest waft wert areal dest a, werd waft ger aaty areteg at , C. Su 5/3 (Cakrapani) As per season and age functions of agni differs i.e. during hemanta rtu (winter) and yauvana (young age), agni is power- ful, during rainy season and old age agni is mild in nature. WARTISA: | C. Su 12/8 It stimulates the digestive fire. TMP AATTS Wage wlafisa: | saurervattardteta cath arta | Power of agni or normal condition of agni is responsible for strength, health, longevity and vital breath. That s why it should be protected by proper intake of food and drinks be- cause these act as a fuel, if person is deprived of food and drinks, agni become disturbed. C. Su 27/342
68 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana wikengysiata a | oat fe otenent: wepferry ads : C..Su 28/3 Consumption of food may be various forms i.e. eatables, beverages, linctus (licked) and masticable foods, which is whole- some if consumed in suitable quantity and free from contami- nation. These substances undergo metabolic transformation by the effect of jatharagni, bhiutagni and dhatvagi. Initially jatharagni gives stimulation to bhutadgni because consumed food is paftcabhautika, it has to undergo transformation by the respective bhitdgni’s then only it becomes easy for tissue me- tabolism by dhatvagnis. Then processed metabolic products circulates inside the srotas continuously by the help of vata dosa. This favours the development, strength, complexion and happiness as well as growth of tissues. Dhatus remain in their normalcy after recieving respective nutrients from metabolised food substances. Tareas greanteen frenecer a ser wfsarcanicas Bae, cert fe STATE: WET ANTE: | ETT rary ofserdy wate fe 1 C. Su 28/3 (Gangadhara) Yathasvenosmana refers to prthivyadhi Pajicabhittagni. Food substances are composed of five mahabhitas and agni’s specific to pancamahabhitta help in the digestion of their re- spective food ingredients after getting stimulation from jatharagni. argdvif act wreagrrdieadt wet) siesta: wongehet sefatger: | wrisvt fread, am fet sitar: | th wafkeea, yerafterenfrwert yc. ci 15/3-4 Jatharagni is the main principle substance responsible for disease and health. During its normalcy it is responsible for longevity, complextion, strength, health, enthusiasm, well built, lustre, immunity (ojas), temperature, other agni’s (bhittagni and dhatvagni) and other vital functions all are dependent on Agni 69 jatharagni. Healthy state of body and diseased condition is entirely dependent on agni. Fes GeernmacraniifaaTaTy | aaftatquenta Waeraa- Aes: | C. Ci 15/5 Food nourishes body dhdtus, ojas, strength, complexion etc. it all depends on equilibrium state of agni otherwise rasa etc. cannot be produced or manufactured from undigested food. Process of Digestion Wet aT) saat: watt gi wrt wa WA wag wang figadt 1 wt Tamera: fear: | aaa CACM - EAT IAISCT | C. Ci 15/6-8 By the help of pranavata food enters the kostha where the food is get disintegrated by fluids and softened by unctous sub- stances. Samanavata stimulates the jatharagni. which is situ- ated in Gm@Saya as a result proper digestion process starts. Agni performs normal functions when food consumed in appropri- ate quantity along with appropriate time and quantity serve as promotor of longevity. Fire helps to boil the rice mixed water for proper cooking, in the same way agni stimulates the diges- tion process for the food substances which are present in amasaya for the production of essence and waste products. SaACM Wes (Avastha-paika) SH AA WEXaeT = Waehd: | ARENT ant WTaTT t way seria i uftfafisareara aq: Fa HEM | C. Ci 15/9-11 During the first stage of digestion sweetness is manifested
70 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiiana resulting in the stimulation of kapha, which is thin and froath in nature. During the process of digestion food remains in the semidigested form i.e. in the form of sourness. This substance moving downwards from the amasaya and stimulates the To- duction of transparent liquid called pitta (bile) and it is the : ond stage of digestion. ee When transformed food reaches the pakvdsaya further transformation takes place and it becomes dried up by agni and it attains bolus form resulting in pungent taste and it atin lates vata and it is the last stage of digestion. ~ UST (Parcabhitagni) drraraarcen: user: waren: TSE Tay wry ufaardt waa fz | qoreatagersy 32 SENT: yore | arfien: offerte yer: veive BW: | C. Ci 15/13-14 hei The five types of bhitagni’s namely parthivagni, Gpyagni, elasagni, vayavagni, Gkasagni helps for the transformation of ive categories of food substances i.e. PGrthiva, Gpya eja, yavly. akasty f f ingredie - téja, vayaviya and Ki a attributes o ood ng. nts re werkt | vitftrenr- Feta WFAA: Us eS ei Het Tafa | C. Ci 15/13-14 (Cakrapani) Agni 7 The five kinds of bhiutagni act on mahdbhutika ingredi- ents of food resulting into production of ultimate specific at- tributes and not only fine particles of food. The term ahara guna can be explained as diet and attributes in any compound. Then term ‘dhdra’ stands for the material representing the substratum of food, undergoes transformations into its fine particles. along with the transformations of its at- tributes during this state of digestion. This can be understood by following. explanation. Food undergoes transformation into two fractions i.e. rasa and mala by jatharagni and bhutagni causes manifestation of the respective attributes specific to these mahabhutas in the ingredients of food. ; The functions of bhitagni as attributed above also takes place at the level of tissue elements because tissues are made up of pafcabhutas. Both dhatvagni and bhitagni act on the principles explained in regard to jatharagni. anata ree (Dhatvagni Paka) waver =o ardat = fafaet: «= ga: I am wana: urn at fee were Cc. ci 15/15 The seven varieties of dhatu supports and sustains the life of the body and these undergo metabolic transformation in two different ways i.e. kitta (waste product) and prasdda (nutrient portion). . Process of Metabolic Transformation Vash dat aM aes a BA AK Wd: Bes YewIad: Wales: | C. Ci. 15/16 The nutrient portion of rasa provides nourishment to rakta, from rakta to mamsa, mamsa to medas, medas to asthi, asthi to majja and majja to §ukra and from Sukra foetus is the outcome. Metabolic transformation from Rasa to Sukra has been ex- plained by Caraka in a following verses.
72 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana THe | aeargqadera4 enfant feercat arcr Ae SARL ator Wasa a | ts qUTaT a Als ray | wet For | ath aa cifras wea orf: Agee TA “At AIT da: Ba: | TRY a: Sle: Use ceases a: aren-arenehrata: afr craasfiag 1 a4 Belt wage TAT penic-aeay | aidifa: ered ten wadegantets: 1 etait - } . C. Ci 15/28-35 The rasa, essenge of food converted. into raktadhatu by the effect of heat generated by pitta. The raktadhatu gets transformed into mamsa accompanied by vayu, jala, tejas and heat brings compactness. The mamsa cooked by its own heat gets transformed into medas. This helps in the excitement of liquidity and unctousness, which are the properties of jala mahabhita. _ Meda brings compactness by the actions of heat present in meda itself upon the mahabhitas i.e. prithvi, jala, vayavya etc. as a result formation of asthi dhatu takes place. All combined together gives rise to hardness and roughness in asthidhatu. By the help of vayu porosity develops inside the bone and this sporous space gets filled up with medas. This unctous sub- stance is called majja. From the essence of majja, Sukra is produced. Porosity is formed inside the bone by the help of vayu, dkaésa etc., through these pores Sukra is produced like water oozing from new earthen jar. The entire body is pervaded by channels and Sukra moves from its own path. These comes out when person: ex- citéd due to sexual urge, determination and amorous mental attitude Sukra reaches the testicle through semen carrying chan- Agni 73 nels. During sexual intercourse Sukra displaces by the effect of heat generated through act of copulation and also liquifies the Sukra like heat liquifies ghee. Sukra comes out from the. testicle in the same way like water flows from higher altitude to lower altitude. _ Wet weariness aes: | tearm fat Aa yea MoT det: cemifatar: 1 era wert aft cat cat nftaafert: 11 : S.Su, 35/27-28 Agni (fire) present in the jathara (stomach) which digests the food is Bhagavan iSwara- almighty god- himself; he re- ceives (substances of) sweet and other tastes (for growth and maintenance of the body), he being subtle (minute) it is not possible to perceive him. Served by prana, apdna and samana (the three divisions of vata), by blowing/increasing, protecting and preserving it. It stimulates other agni to carry out their re- spective functions. Process of Digestion senna wafer sia: taudtsf ari deat: cars Weal - ARAN: TATA SEA Tees Wea are: K. S. Khi 16/11-12 In healthy individual during awakening and sleep, the di- gestive fire excited by samana vata due to association of inspi- ration and expiration and being. blown by uddna vata proper digestion takes place. : aor Tange acinar | yay wees set Be ferfineeret wer | faerm: Gaquarse: teats aa a: anift att ata aaftradtag: areroneft eet tareneyt WeRAUTT’ | C. Ci 15/36-37 Simultaneous and continuous circulation of rasadhatu takes place all over the body by the help of vydna vdta. If any 7 Vik. & Roga
74 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana abnormality evolved in the rasavaha srotas as a result disease manifest like cloud in the sky brings rain. In the same way ab- normality in dosa manifest diseases. Inportance of Jatharagni at fe aa fat wera agvitdory er | W cicarecma vite, aarasat: wy ai C. Ci 15/38-4] Functions of various agni elaborately discussed above. Jatharagni is the chief among all types of agnis because func- tions of bhutagni and dhatvagni depends on this. Aggravation or diminution of jatharagni results in aggravation or diminu- tion of bhiutdgni and dhdtvagni. Therefore by all means one has to protect jathdragni by consuming suitable wholesome dietetics and behaviour because longevity and strength depends on normal state of agni. On the contrary one who consumes unwholesome diet due to greed, succumbs to disease caused by the vitiation of grahani. Grahani dosa reters to diseases located in grahani. This specific term refers to 4 types of grahani roga. This also in- cludes agnimandhya, ajirna etc. which are manifest due to vi- tiation of grahani. The term ‘grahani’ as a disease entity spe- cifically used for the ailment grahani gada, which manifest due to malfunctioning of the grahani: Wat weer eng fasievaft orem: | Cc. Ci 15/50 Irregular digestion and metabolism causes imbalance in Agni 75 dhatus. The intense digestion and metabolism and less con-. sumption of food leads to depletion of dhatus. saihea-3 wy frreafitersisharsqiead, sera fiat TeTEMeewratars haart: feadsatarte; ater aia Tee, sree vlad, seraret wart + waq frrcakrtanreats fatete S. Su 21/5 It is a question of debate to say pitta and agni are one and | the same. Is there any separate agni other than pitta? or pitta itself is agni? For this Susruata said no separate agni is found other than pitta. It is due to the properties of hotness in pitta leading to burning, cooking and such similar functions performed by pitta is considered as agni itself and it is called antardgni. During. diminished state, use of similar properties of drugs advised and during increased state resorting to cold treatments have been advocated, no mention of agni found in the texts. freer cer feed Si ‘afer faa areas Ratti aq wnecial: fi pls Sail i seat ir afferents tattt dg, a wo veut: ; tata fara afer sient fraftia san, evapora fReaROATOT UAT GIT A WeRTETH: | C. Su 21/10 Pitta is located in between pakvasaya and amasaya, which digest the four types of food by unseen factors, separates the the dosas, rasa, mitra and purisa, remaining there itself it helps the other sites of pitta elsewhere in the body by bestowing prop- erties of pitta, this is known as pdcakagni. Pitta, which found in yakrt and pliha is known as raiijakagni and it bestows red colour to rasadhatu.
76 Ayurvediya Vjkrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana '. Pitta, which is located in hrdaya is known as sadhakagni and it is responsible for fulfilling. the desires of the mind. ‘ -Pitta, which is located in drsti.is known as Glocakagni and it is responsible for perception of vision. Pitta, which<ds located ‘in skin is known bhrajakagni and it ‘is responsible for digestion and absorption of substances used in the form of anointing, bathing, washing, immersing and poul- ticing etc. and it also helps for expression of shades and com- plexion to skin. at atten (Agni Pariksi-Examination of the Digestive Fire) wrfriats hacaet Urata: 1 a uafaet vafa-ararfaost Te:; fafrarroafafeut wafa-faant ara, diac: faa, wa: Feo, na A: Sverre | wa, at aeRO S. Su 35/24-25 ‘Pacakagni is stated to be responsible for digestion and metabolism. It is of four kinds based on the involvement of _dosa.— i) First variety is not associated with dosa and it is called samdgni state and it is the physiological state of agni. Remain- ing three varieties of agni are the pathological conditions de- velops due to abnormality in dosa. ii) Visamagni state due to vata. iii) Tiksnagni state due to pitta. . Agni 77° iv) Manddgni state due to kapha. Samagni state of agni is the condition in which dosds are in equilibrium state and performs normal digestion and metabo- lism functions. Vv) Visamagni is the state in which improper digestion and metabolism takes place i.e. some times performs normal func- tions followed by abnormal one and manifest flatulence, ab- dominal pain, upward movement of vata inside the kostha, di- arrhoea, heaviness in abdomen, intestinal gurgling and strain- ing excercise for evacuation of stools. vi) Tiksnagni is the state in which hyperfunctioning of di- gestion & metabolic activities observed. In this particular state digestion become’ quicker. More quantity of consumed food also digests very quickly. The same agni if increases greatly is called atyagni, in this state person become capable of digesting large amount of food very quickly if consumed oftenly. At the end of, digestion it prodices dryness of the throat, palate and lips, burning sensa- tion and enhances warmthness in body: Mandagni is the state in which digestion process become weak and takes long time to digest the less quantity of food and manifest heaviness in abdomen and head, cough, dyspnoea, excessive salivation, vomiting and weaknes of the body. e Visamagni state gives rise to manifestation of vdtavyadhi. © Tiksnagni state gives rise to genes is of pittaja vikara. e Mandagni : state gives rise. to evolution of kaphaja vikara.
Chapter 6 STL (Srotas) The word srotas derived from ‘sru’ gatau dhatu, which means movement. Definition and Importance of Srotas. AAO BALE C.Su 30/12 It is the path helps for transfortation of substances is called srotas. everett eee te TE TUT | Nutrient substances are supplied to cells and tissues via the process of transudation through path is called srotas. arate warrerreh 11 C.Vi 5/3 Channels carry the transformed dhGtus to different desti- nations through their mess of network to nourish the cells and tissues. IRM, Ger se wad wires aq aaetiefa faga faa ot aftrpiy s.$a 9/73 Srotasas are defined as empty spaces spreaded to entire body, which originates from root space except sira and dhamani. oreviaaariant ee arnt afer fa: aint am @ wera: ti S.Su 9/13 (Dalhana) All the entire empty space wherever it is present distrib- uted uniquely for the supply of proper nourishment to the body is called srotas. Synonyms are sira, srotamsi, marga, kha, dhamani. C.Su 30/12 (Cakrapani) Srotas 79. TW MOTE Be saa: | a a aera wet renga B.P.Pii 3/271 Srotasas are those in which manas, prana, anna, jala, dosa, dhatu, updhatu, dhatumala, mitra, purisa axe circulating. wanka fe aarfent aiaifa aa: | agh wim dear veered Aa mfg B.P.Pit. 3/272 It is not possible to numerate all srotasas because these are innumerable. ara walt (Synonyms of Srotas) @raifa, fita:, wt:, Tar: Taaea:, ASM: TaT:, amt:, ythhesin, daadanh, tars, sayrn:, Feavaft WR TRaeea a Meee aah waa | C.Vi 5/9 Synonyms of srotas are as follows—srotamsi, sira, dhamani, rasayani, rasavahi, nddyad, panthana, margda, Sariracchidrani, samvrtasamvrtani, sthandni, GSaya, niketa etc. millions of srotas are present in the body. wa Sree fasta: fat vat: | A.S.Sb 6/48 Sira and dhamani are the modifications of srotas only. Srotas, sird, dhamani resides «:losely and perform similar functions. Structure of Srotas faarifien qeafir ax ferrets & 1 erofin eta 22 tat Aeceiiaa 1) A.H.S& 3/46 Orifices of the srotas are minute, spreaded long and far away like lotus stalk. Through such channels ‘rasa’ circulates and nourishes cells and tissues. Colour of the Srotas amg aah qREqerIN a
80 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiina aicifa Qatrrpen sere 11 C.Vi 5/25, A.H.Sa 3/45 Srotasas attain the colour of the dhdtu in which they cir- culate. These are circular, big, small, long and resembles like lines of a leaf. cert Epa (Importance of Srotas in Pathogenesis) afet Saar ah gee tena, fagerh geet a | A.H.Sa 3/42 Improper foods, erratic behaviour and such other things which are not conducive to the body brings abnormality in srotas leading to manifestation of disease. Adoptance of normal con- . ducive foods ‘and actions leads to happiness and sound health. Siitfaardt de: wearers Waren | S$ 9/2, AH. 3/48 Injury to the srotas manifest incurable condition, that’s why such information should be given to the patient and to his attenders and then proceed to the treatment to remove foreign body. Fl tend Gitar wairrare frentergsa | C.Vi 5/7 Bodily humours vata, pitta and kapha moves inside the Srotas to perform their normal functions at different places. Simi- larly things which are beyond perception of sensory organs like mind etc. move inside the srotas and are located in sentinent portion of the body. Healthy srotasas perform their normal func- tions as a result body is free from diseases and un healthy srotas become root cause for the development of pathogenesis. asta ar etait a 1 eteifa eraava sige aut eeletagahrant Ber ater: A a wreagit gercafia dara | C.S.8a 6/22 Srotas 81 Once the empty spaces (srotas) become abnormal, it brings abnormality in normal dhdtu by not transforting to required destination, this is because of the abnormality in srotas. Srotas vitiates other srotas, dhatus vitiates other dhatus, for all these happenings disturbed dosas are responsible. Dosds get aggra- vated by the disturbed functions of agni. That’s why life span, health, strength and nourishment etc. are depends on agni. Due to their pervasion to entire body, they become re- sponsible for aggravation as well as alleviation of dosas inside the body. That’s why some people says that body is the con- glomeration of srotas. aaa TAT (Srotovedha laksana) ara 9 Siva Ateaereart aft set: | wenayer faoqatet acta atl @iiifeandt de: wearers werea | seri vied uaa we: aafaerat: 1 A.H.S&@ 3/47-48 Clinical features develop due to injury to srotas are un- consciousness, tremors, distention of abdomen, vomiting, fe- ver, delirium, pain, obstruction for urine and stool, death. That’s why considering these points physician should inform to the patient attender about its poor prognosis and then plan the treat- ment by removing the foreign body and manage the wounds as per wounds line of treatment. — aad q arat aH the are weroeTageTTEhe Geeks werafat ofa aft ya gale Ven aa a 1 Te Atlee TeETTATTATT | A.S.Sa 6/19 Injury to srotas leads to development of giddiness, uncon- sciousness (confusion), tremors, delirium, distension of abdo- men, pain, anorexia, thirst, vomiting, fever, bleeding from in- jured site, obstruction for urine & stool and lastly death. Start the line of treatment by intimating its poor prognosis.
82 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijitana & Roga Vijitana Git Ve ( Classification of Srotas) Mainly srotas is classified into two kinds namely bahya and abhyantara srotas. According to Sasruta Bahya srotas or bahirmukha srotas in Males are 09 in num- ber and in Females 12 in number.. According to Sararigadhara Bahya srotas or bahirmukha srotas in Males are 10 in num- ber and in Females 13 in number. According to Caraka Abhyantara srotas or antarmukhi srotas are 13 in number and 11 pairs according to Sugruta. Susruta does not included asthivaha, majjavaha and svedavaha srotas. ata at afeta Ne (Bahya Srotas or Bahirmukha Srotas) wrt tauayats ator seri A.H.SG 3/40-41, A.S.Sa 6/34 write wtormantar a stoi 3 carreras 1 5. $a 5/10 We Tat Borat 2 2 TH wala 1) Asrna searontdss %: eeritter: | qenheattin arent wah cafes aA S.S.Pu 5/63-65 A AR Gs. 02 (Nasal cavities) (Nasa randhra) B wot TH (Karna randhra) 02 (Ear cavities) Srotas 83 C AT Ta 02 (Eye path) (Nayana randhra) D Ast wT Ag) 01 (Genital path) (Mehana randhra) BE We te (Sr Wy) 01 (Anal canal) (Guda randhra) F ded Ge (aeq) 01 (Oral cavity) (Vadana randhra) Total 9 channels are described as bahirmukha channels i.e. channels having opening outside. Sarafigadhara included one more to above nine i.e. TIh WH (Brain canal). In case of females 3 more srotas are included namely A I 02 (Breast channels) (Stana randhra) 1 (Uterus path) TRU (STRATE) Teas FA TT (Raktapatha) (Adhastad, raktavaha or garbha randhra) AMAT ae (Abhyantara Srotas) amsuaved: etd sitar WANA MUTA APACE 1 | Woitcara ta vrata Ye Ya Ye taal | C.Vi 5/7 13 varieties of srotas are depicted as abhayantara srotas (inward opening channels). A.S.S& 6/35 1. Pranavaha srotas 2. Udakavaha srotas
84 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana 3. Annavaha srotas 4. Rasavaha srotas 5S. Rudhiravaha srotas 6. Mamsavaha srotas 7. Medovaha srotas 8. Asthivaha srotas _ 9. Majjavaha srotas 10. Sukravaha srotas 11. Mittravaha srotas 12. Purisavaha srotas 13. Svedavaha srotas II Pairs According to Susruta oP g sonia TH we wie Fat ya gee Ypardarerenhy; aeafirere:, Waar aghr wast fester wea: a1 S.$4a 9/12 . Pranavaha srotas—02 . Annavaha srotas—02 - Udakavaha srotas—02 . Rasavaha srotas—02 Raktavaha srotas—02 Mamsavaha srotas—02 - Medovaha srotas—02 - Miutravaha srotas—02 . Purisavaha srotas—02 . Sukravaha srotas—02 . Artavavaha srotas—02 ar : BK OOMTINAWNBRWNHH Why Susruta did not included asthivaha, majjavaha and svedavaha srotas? : af aa eaanfeg ata: | wefan: se ? afar caer, + a Tencrenthord feet create aM fers, wei aaermmfe aac aatyeiete, yavta wart Se: VearAa tat Yer freer fer: 1.54 9/12 (Dalhana) Srotas 85 Asthivaha srotas, majjavaha srotas and svedavaha srotas originated from the meda and it was discussed in detail under medovaha srotas..As these srotasas pervaded the entire body, that’s why it is not possible to explain the symptoms of entire region. Moreover it doesn’t come under the purview of surgeons. eats fer (Etiological Factors for Srotodusti) stenve faerva a: Caer: aa: | argfafqot aga atest A WEN: (1 C.Vi 5/23, A.H. Sa 3/44 Improper dietetics which aggravates vatadi dosds i.e. per- son who is not following the rules and regulations of eight fold diet principles. Erratic behaviour or activities related to speech, body and mind aggravates the vatadi dosdas. Diet and activities which are contrary to dhatus. For ex- ample day sleep and fatty foods which aggravates meda dhdatu and brings vitiation in them. inspite of having identical proper- ties. So, dhdtubirviguna refers to factors which are unwhole- some and non conductive to the dhatus. Siiefe WaAIr (Classification of Sroto Dusti) afargfa: ag at ferro sratsftrer | farit a wet atirat ef mari C.Vi 5/24, A.H.Sa 3/45 There are mainly four kinds of srotodusti explained. 1. Ati pravrtti 2. Satgha 3. Sira granthi 4. Vimargagamana afarata [Atipravrtti (Excessive actions)] Example : -Excessive urination—Prameha
86 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Excessive watery stools—Atisara Excessive mucous secretions—-Tamakasvasa Wy [Sanga (Complete or partial obstruction of srotas. M Example: e@ Miutrakrcchra e Vibandha e Jvara e@ Grahani etc. fertaPa (Siragranthi (fea aed, ie. nodules, tumours, newgrowths inside the srotas) Example : Arsa, udara roga, carmakila etc. fearhrast [Vimargagamana (Leaving its own path and enter- ing into other path)]. Example : fearhrt a get nerea garanf arafirent Cakrapani Entrance of mala into mitra marga. Bhagandara Raktapitta Udara roga Kamala Tamaka Svasa Sopha Injury (S.Sa 9/12) WTAE BA, (Pranavaha Srotas) Channels carrying Pranavayu is called pranavaha srotas. Yet (Root) OF Wolagrt Shkreat Ces Yet Herel | C.Vi 5/8 Channels carrying Pranavayu originates from hrdaya (heart) and maha srotas (gastro intestinal act). WA WUTee 8, wabfei eee Taenfraver MEA 1 s$0 9/72 Srotas 87 Pranavaha srotas are two in number and they originate from hrdaya (heart) and rasavahi dhamani (arteries carrying rasa). wore Sidiefs Far (Nidana (Etiological factors)] Factors which brings abnormality in pranavaha srotas are as follows— TA TAUNTS, aTRAEAT ET mora gata edicesty erect: 11 C.Vi S/10, AS.Sa 9/36 Depletion of dhdtus, suppression of natural urges, intake of ruksadi Ghara and vihara, heavy exercises during hunger and other factors which brings vitiation in Srotas. Wore args MAY (Pranava Srotodusti Laksana) The following symptoms manifest due to vitiation in pranavaha srotas are as follows. epfaadeqred avilent at upteg Yet Haga Gea MUTA ataifa seerhia fared | " C.Vi 5/8 Prolonged respiration Obstructed respiration Agitated respiration Frequent respiration Respiration associated with sound and pain aa faa mle Hest waar doa uot at safe 1 S.S$a 9.12 Injury to pranavaha srotas leads to groaning, bending down of the body, illusion, tremors, or ultimately death. wroTag Wid fast (Diseases of Prainavaha Srotas) e Svasa e Kasa
88 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Hikka : Rajayaksma Hrdroga Svarabheda Sanyasa Vadtavyadhi | SHAE MAT (Udakavaha Srotas) Channels which carries udaka (water) is called’ udakavaha- srotas. : Synonyms : Ambuvaha, toyavaha, udakavaha Yel (Root) SeHaEMi Stat ae att a C.Vi 5/8 Udakavaka srotas have their origin in talu (palate) and kloma (pancreas), : . sqmae 8, cabfel ary aeitt a) S.Sa. 9/12 Udakavaha srotas are two in number and they originates from talu (palate) and kloma (pancreas). Ferm (Etiological factors) WeTEMTEA UTA RATATAT | srgatet gata qengenft tear i C.Vi S/1I Udakavaha srotas gets vitiated by exposure to heat, indi- gestion, fear, excess intake of drinks, intake of dry food and who is suffering from excessive thirst. SaHaqe aldtales MAW (Udakavaha Sroto Dusti Laksana) Taare! C.Vi 5/8 Characteristic vitiation of udakavaha srotas are dryness Srotas ; 89 in tongue, palate, lips & kloma along with excessive severe thirst. aa fagea fraren cet ai a1 Injury to udakavaha srotas develops thirst and patient dies instanteneously within 7 days. JaHaE ea fAHe (Diseases of Udakavaha Srotas) e Prameha e Udara roga e Sopha @ Tamaka svasa e Trsna , e Panatyaya aTHaAS WAT (Annavaha Srotas) Channels carrying anna (food) is called annavaha srotas. Yel (Root) SIAM SAAN Yet, aPT a urge | C.vi 5/8 Annavaha srotas originates from @ma@sSaya (stomach) and vama parsva. aaee 3, wibferranrmisawenteaya wes: 1 $4 9/12 Annavaha srotas are two in number and they have their origin in dmagaya (stomach) and annavahi dhamani (anna car- rying dhamanies). fer (Etiological factors) araear arent afer a AAT | saatfeht gata ayvam weet ait Ci S/T The following etiologies brings vitiation in annavaha srotas. S.§4 9/12 e Excess intake of food e Eating during improper time e Consumption of unwholesome food e Due to impairment in agni e Injury (S.Sa 9/12) 8 Vik. & Roga
90 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana waqge atatehe wTaTTT (Annavaha Srotodusti Laksana) faurat off a geen saaeraga anita weer fre | C.Vi 5/8 Characteristic properties of annavaha Srotas vitiation are as follows— e Lack of interest towards food e Anorexia e Indigestion e Vomiting aaag Aldtefe feat (Diseases of Annavaha Srotas) © Chardi @ Mukharoga © Atisdra ° Amlapitta © Ajirna e Visucika e@ Agnimandhya :@ Vilambika © Krmi e Arsa e Arocaka © Sila © Gulma | @ Udara roga Taag ater, (Rasavaha Srotas) Channels which carries rasa (nutrient substances) is called rasavaha srotas. Yet (Root) Waaert Steet sea Yet ae a TT | C.Vi 5/8 Rasavaha srotas have their root in hrdaya (heart) and dasa dhamani (ten vessels). Tree 8, Taft eed teense aa: | S.$a 9/12 Rasavaha srotas are two in number and they originate from hrdaya (Heart) and rasavahi dhamani (rasa carrying chan- nels). Srotas 91 FEM (Etiological factors) veatet gata faxarat arftferrar1i C.Vi. 5/13 The following factors brings vitiation in rasavaha srotas are as follows— e Intake of heavy & cold substances e Excess intake of unctous substances e Consumption of excess food e Intake of wholesome and unwholesome food together © Excessive worry. Tade aie AAW (Rasavaha Srotodusti Laksana) Lack of interest towards food, anorexia, distaste in mouth etc. described under sama rasa dhdatu. aa fared vita: srorere Facgercer weut aeerTAY a S.$& 9/12 . Injury to rasavaha srotas manifest Sosa, other symptoms similar to pranavahasroto vedha laksana and death. tae arat faa (Diseases of Rasavaha Srotas) e HArdroga @ Rajayaksma e Medo roga e@ Jvara e Prameha e@ Miurcha & Sanyasa e@ Rasagata kustha © Visarpa e Visamajvara e Dhatugata jvara © Vatarakta e Pandu e Klaibya © Sosa vnttrrag IN (Sonitavaha Srotas) . Channels which carries fonita (blood) is called fonitavaha sratas. Yet (Root) . viforraert Bice AHAyeT wit a | C.Vi 5/8
92 -Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Sonitavaha srotas have their root in yakrt (liver) and pliha (spleen). wae 3, watiet warq whet cranes et: | SSa 9/12 Raktavaha srptas are two in number and have their root in _ yakrt (liver), pltha (spleen) and raktavahi dhamani (rakta car- rying channels). fret (Etiological factors) fearon fers xerfot a1 cHafen qatar ws arate tt C.Vi 5/14 The following factors brings vitiation in Sonitavuha srotas are as follows. e Intake of substances which induces burning sensation inside the body. e Excessive consumption of unctous, hot, watery sub- ' stances --@ Excessive: exposure to sun and heat _@ Injury (S.$a 9/12) frat ratte antent saferens firetgarana erred sefireren sitoifereaeaereraeae eee TET | | S.Su 21/25 Rakta aggravating factors are as follows— e All pitta aggravating factors. e Excess intake of liquid, unctuous, heavy foods. Sleeping during day time. e Excessive anger, exposure to fire and sun; exertion, in- jury, eating during indigestion, eating antagonistic foods and taking food during digestion etc. aeh ofan att oma «= peprafa wearer ae att ocaret freq Weta S.Su 21/25 Srotas 93 Without the involvement of dosdas, rakta will not aggra- vate and time of aggravation may be known as per involve- ment of dosa. - oitfiraae aiitefz AAT (Sonitavaha Srotodusti Laksana) The following symptoms develop after the vitiation of Sonitavaha srotas are as follows— Kustha, visarpa etc. which are described in detail under sama rakta. aft S.84 9/12 Injury to raktavaha srotas manifest bluish discolouration of body, fever, burning sensation, paleness, haemorrhages, red- ness in eye. vitfirrag etat faentt (Diseases of Sonitavaha Srotas) e Krostuka §irsa e Vdatarakta e Masurika e Kustha e Visarpa e Svitra @ Raktapitta e Daha e Raktadhatugatajvara e Asrgdhara e Vidradhi e Arésa e Raktagulma e Kamala © Sitapitta e Udarda e Kotha area NTA (Mamsavaha Srotas) Channels which carries the substances to nourish mamsa is called mamsavaha srotas. Yer (Root) Rat a Strat Gael IH TI C.Vi 5/8 Mamsavaha srotas have their origin in sndyu (ligaments) andi tvak (skin).
94 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana Aieae 8, Tablet grea TeHaerayas MT: 1 8.$4 9/13 Mamsavaha srotas are two in number and have their roots in snadyu (ligaments), tvaca (skin) and raktavahdnyascha dhamani (rakta carrying dhamani). fren (Etiological factors) afhreareh direkt rapnht a yer a | arent gata ymi a wauat feati cv sys Due to following etiological factors mamsavaha srotas become vitiated. e Intake of food substances which induce moistureness in dosa, dhatu, srotas e Heavy food e Bulk promoting foods e Intake of food followed by day sleep e Injury (S. Sa W/I2) areag aint MAM (Mamsavaha Srotodusti Laksana) The following manifestations develops due to morbidity in madmsavaha srotas. Granuloma, tonsilitis etc, described un- der sama mamsa. wa ferata yoragparer vita: fart weRR ATU | S.8G 9/12 Injury to mamsavaha srotas manifest inflammation in muscles, muscle wasting, varcicose veins and death. HitaE Gidt freak (Diseases of Mamsavaha Srotas ) e Prameha © Rajayaksma e Kustha © Visarpa e Mamsagata jvara e@ Arsa e Vdatarakta e Sotha e Vidradhi' e: Masurika Hatag MITT (Medovaha Srotas) Channels which carries the substances which nourishes meda is called medovaha srotas. Srotas 95 Yet (Root) alae rat seat yet aaa a C.Vi 5/8 Medavaha srotas have their root in vrkkau (kidneys) and vapavahana (omentum). aaat 2, wife we geet o $:8a 9/12 Medovaha srotas is of two types and originates from kati (waist) and vrkkau (kidneys). Faas qeat vrata A.S& 6/43 Medovaha srotas have their root in vrkkau & mamsa (muscles). frart (Etiological factors) . STATA SaAC-ASI Mier MV, | ; - Reafet gaba arvana, || C.Vi 5/16 The following etiological factors brings vitiation in medovaia srotas. e Lack of physical exercises Day sleep Excess intake of fatty foods Excess drinking of varuni (a kind of wine) Injury (S.Sa 9/12) Ratag aiiats AAW (Medovaha Srotodusti Laksana) Due to vitiation in medavaha srotas following symptoms develops. Asta nindita purusa, prameha etc. described in detail under sama meda. . : aa faeer aRrr ferenge Ae Vite: eyet Vita Ararat al C.S.8& 9/12 Injury to medovaha srotas leads to excessive perspiration, unctousness or sliminess of body parts, dryness in ‘alu; marked swelling and severe thirst.
96 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiana Ralag art frat (Diseases of Medovaha Srotas) e Prameha © Medo roga © Svitra @ Jvara © Visamajvara e Medodhatugata jvara e Kustha © Vatarakta © Masirika e Sotha e Slipada e Udara roga — lA (Asthivaha Srotas) Channels which carries the substances which nourish asthi is called asthivaha srotas. Yer (Root) afteaert atrat adt qet set a C.Vi 5/8 Asthivaha srotas have their roots in meda (adipose tissue) and Jaghana (buttocks). -. FIST (Etiological factors) Srametiatwgeaata — ferersare ahead gata aac a tar 1 C.Vi 5/17 The following factors brings vitiation in asthivavaha srotas are as follows. e Excessive physical exercises e Over strain to bones e Friction among bones in excess ¢ Consumption of vata aggravating factors atrag atitgts Haut (Asthivaha Srotodusti Laksana) Due to abnormality in asthivaha srotas following symp- toms develops i.e: pain in bones and teeth, discolouration etc. described in detail in under saéméasthi. ata adit fare (Diseases of Asthivaha Srotas) @ Amavdta e Sandhivata Srotas 97 e Kustha bd e Jvara e Rajayaksma e Vdatarakta @ Asthidhatugata jvara © Asthidhatugata kustha e Visamajvara e Danta roga © Masurika Would AA (Majjavaha Srotas) Channels which carry the substance to nourish majja is called majjavaha srotas. Yet (Root) aesaert aeranatt yet arse C.Vi 5/8 Majjavaha srotas have their root in asthi (bones) and san- dhi Goints). far (Etiological factors) seerecafirerarafreanrangy wats arate gata freami a Fam! Vi 5/8 Majjavaha srotas gets vitiated by excessive crushing, in- creased moisture, injury, compression of bone and intake of incompatible dietetics. FEHATAE Blitele AAV (Majjavaha Srotodusti Laksana) Due to majjavaha srotas vitiation the following symptoms develop. e Pain in joints - © Giddiness etc. described indetail under sama mayja. TWsHAas Balan (Diseases of Majjavaha Srotas) e Sandhivata © Amavata e Vatarakta e Kustha @ Rajayaksma e Prameha © Mastrika e Visamajvara e Majjadhatugata Jvara © Paksaghata
98 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijflana & Roga Vijiiana Vnas ara (Ss ukravaha Srotas) Channels which carry the substances to nourish §ukra is called Sukravaha srotas. Synonyms : Viryavahi (Sarafigadhar), retovahi (Caraka). Yet (Root) WPaert Gita qavityet vray | C.Vi 5/8 Sukravaha srotas have their origin in vrsanau (testicles) and Sepha (penis). Uae 8, wath er gait a1 S.8a 9/12 Sukravaha srotas are two in number and have their root in stanau (breasts) and vrsanau (testiles). Qpreterat eer gest asst a 1 A.Sa 6/43 Sukravaha srotas have their root in stana (breast), muskau (scroatum) and majja (bone marrow). PEM (Etiological factors) stenreret Paraariasterett ATE atest geht vrararofacacn 11 C.Vi 5/19 The following. factors brings vitiation in Sukravaha srotas are as follows— - e Sexual intercourse without proper sexual arousal or having sexual intercourse with other animals like dog etc. Suppression of sexual urge Excess indulgence in sexual activities Injury by surgery, alkalies and cauterization Rae atdigh wart (Sukravaha Sroto Dusti Laksaya) Vitiated sukravaha srotas develops following sympt- oms, wa feraea wetter fern, mete UH RSA | S.$a 9/12 Srotas 99 Injury to sukravaha srotas leads to impotency, delayed emission of Sukra, Sukra comes out with rakta along with diffi- culty. . pray wat ferent (Diseases of Sukravaha Srotas) e Kiaibya @ Kustha i) Bijopaghataja klaibya ti) Dhvajabharigaja klaibya iii) Jaraja klaibya iv) Sukra ksayaja klaibya e Jvara e Rajayaksma @ Grahani roga @ A&smari e Sukradhatugata jvara @ Masurika e Sosa e Arsa fer (Etiological factors) DTA AAMTAAA FT AeA | BteHTe ATS TAA aT Rept Ta Tease: caftrnarentieraumeioaaand | AOTC AAT TRAST TEM | PAVIA | eT RETE- Whang ents: ahha a | area aaron agai argon | Ber: UereR TTT aT wee Tate: Feet: | Yee AGUEPRNTY...... | C.Ci 30/135-138 The following factors brings abnormality in sukravaha srotas are as follows. e@ Sexual intercourse in excess Heavy physical exercises Consumption of unwholesome food Untimely sexual intercourse * Indulging. in sexual activities with other animals and other than female genital organs. ; e Controlling semen during the time of ejaculation. e Intake of food which are ununctous, bitter, astringent, salt, sour & hot.
100 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana e Indulging in sexual intercourse with women who is not passionate. e Old age, worry, grief and lack of confidence in partner. ¢ Injury to genital organs by sharp instruments, alkalies, cauterization e Fear, anger and application of black magic Severe emaciation due to chronic diseases Suppression of natural urges Injury to dhatus Vitiation in dhatus Te Ws ae (Asta Sukra Dosa) ; tafret aq wat a faraut qfe fafeers | ee TASES | C.Ci 30/239.240 Eight kinds of morbidity observed in Sukra are as follows : . Froathy semen . Thin semen . Rough or ununctous semen - Discolouration . Foul smell . Slimy semen . Semen mixed with other dhatus . Sinking of semen in water YAaAS GAA (Miitravaha Srotas) Channels which carry the mitra is called mittravaha srotas. Yet (Root) Want Bita afrfet aguit a1 C.Vi 5/8 Mutravaha srotas have their root in basti (urinary blad- der) and vanksanau (kidneys). Wad 2, wanfei afetd a1 8.$4 9/12 Miutravaha srotas are two in number and have their origin in basti (urinary bladder) and medhra (penis). SCIYDWAWNH Srotas 101 TeF (Etiological factors) yates van otters fet yaar geafa atureafierdeca = 11 C.Vi 5/20 Intake of drinks & foods during urge for micturation. Indulging in sex during the urge for micturation. Suppression of urge for urination. One who is emaciated and injured. Injury S.8a 9/12 Wag artes MAN (Mitravaha Srotodusti Laksana) ehaifa veertate freq, | C.Vi 5/8 The following characteristic features develop due to the Vitiation of mitravaha srotas are as follows— e Excessive urination Complete obstruction for urination Urine comes out with difficulty Patient passes little quantity of urine frequently. Patient passes large quantity of urine associated with pain wa fexcareateam ya Pre: caer Ae aA 5.84 9/12 | Injury to mitravaha srotas develops e Stiffness in bladder e Obstruction for urination e Stiffness or numbness in penis Wag Sri faHnr (Diseases of Mittravaha Srotas) e Prameha e Mitraghata e Miutrkrcchra e Agsmari e Kamala e Pandu e Jvara
102 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana qth ae RA (Purisavaha Srotas) Channels which carry the purisa is called purisavaha srotas Synonyms : varcovaha, purisavaha Yet (Root) River strat wearer yet cap aE C.Vi 5/8 Purisavaha srotas origi ; ai. 5 ginates from pakvdSaya (large i tines) and sthida guda (rectum) Ma Caras inkes- qiwed 2, qaihfei wart a a) S.SG 9/12 ; Purisavaha srotas are two in number and have their root in pakvadsaya (large intestine) and guda (anus) Fart (Etiological factors) ETO L TAT SAUTE ! aetenteh garages: eer aT 1 C.Vi 5/21 The following fact i itiati i srotan & factors brings vitiation in purisavaha Suppression of urge for stools Consumption of large quantity of food Eating during indigestion Eating food before the di i gestion of previ Whose agni is weak ° ous men Who is emaciated Injury tiwag aliefs MAW (Purisavaha Srotodusti Laksana) AGEN q Urcunfird fete feeart walt; were edoreaea 1 vreg IST afeimarfae afar ag ste Perera : wa iva aiaifa ueerita faeng | C.Vi 5/8 Due to vitiation in i purtsavaha srotas the: i toms will appear © following symp- Srotas 103 e Patient passes stool with difficulty, passes little quan- tity of stool associated with pain and sound e Passing of excess watery stool or scybalous stool (mu- cous with thready) wa fart Gren afsarad ot S.8a 9/12 Due to injury following symptoms develop e Distension of abdomen e Foul smell stool e Passes thready mucous stools along with intussus- ception of the intestine. atta iat facntt (Diseases of Purisavaha Srotas) e Atisara @ Grahani dosa e@ Visucika e Vilambika e Kamala e Amlapitta e Ajirna e Amavata e Pravahika e Arsa e Udara roga e Udavarta e Gulma e Asmari wade aT, (Svedavaha Srotas) Channels which carry the sveda is called svedavaha sro- tas. Yet (Root) Pacaart Atte Aat yor it Pays | C.Vi 5/8 Svedavaha srotas originates from meda (adipose tissue) and lomakipa (hair follicles). fret (Etiological Factors) frei aa 2 i earfett guata sate vies weeteT 1 C.Vi 5/22 The following factors briigs vitiation in svedavaha srotas. e Heavy exercises
104 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijfiana e Excessive exposure to sun and heat e Indulging or exposure to cold and heat simultaneously e Anger e Grief @ Fear : eae Utes TAT (Svedavaha Srotedusti Lakgana) ureerafa yoraurmagea uftaré vite a \ ager waeaneavat aiaifer weertrit fen | C.Vi 5/8 Due to vitiation in svedavaha srotas following sympto- matology appears. e Absence of. perspiration e Excess perspiration e Excessive roughness e Excessive smoothness e Burning sensation all over the body e Horripilation waeag ardt fant (Diseases of Svedavaha Srotas) © Kustha e Prameha e Sthaulya e Jvara e Udara roga © Medoroga e Daha roga e Visarpa e Raktapitta @ Masurika © Sitapitta. © Udarda e Kotha sidaae wa (Artavavaha Srotas) Channels which carry thé Grtava is called artavavaha srotas. FET (Root) ardaae 8, datiei wufsra andfaenfeersea area t 5.$4 9/12 Artavavaha srotas ate two in number and have their ori- gin in garbhasaya (uterus) and drtavavahi dhamani (artava carrying vessels). Srotas 105 aidaae Biel freA (Diseases of Artavavaha Srotas) Raktapradara, Yonivyapat (20 types), Jalasrava (§vetapradara). fen (Etiological Factors) asad aad at maureen a wera faa ferent fairer a meter ten wert ort afer) wey Gat wren: pfedisha: Th Woomera nels: fart: | Tia: wf wee aq ct: | sen, feninery caer, Reese C.Ci 30/205-208 The following factors brings vitiation in Grtavavaha srotas are as follows— e Excessive consumption of salt, sour, heavy, pungent, burning, unctous, meat of acquatic and marshy land animals. e Excess intake of fatty, sweet preparations. curd and its products, fermented wine etc. © Agitated vatadi dosds bring abnormality in garbhadsaya and develops garbhaSaya janya vyddhi’s. ardaae Giitele Mart (Artavavah~ Srotodusti Laksana) Colour of the disc. wge becomes froathy, thin, ununctous, brownish black, pink or like juice of paldsa etc. arantett Btry (Vagvahini Srotas) arenrfet fart tent far weratsfre: 1 frareara: a Aas omarion | A.S.Ni 15/33 Vata residing in the path of speech causes disturbance in the tongue like reduced movement of tongue, manifest diffi- culty in chewing, drinking and talking. 9Vik. & Roga
106 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Diseases Jihvastambha, Faas NR (Stanyavaha Srotas) Channels which carry stanya (breast milk) is called stanyavaha srotas. FoI (Root) Stanyavaha srotas have their root in rasa dhadu. “ fer (Etiological factors) aniturieafaantresreardt SRATL | wane wean wera wv aan) wm: wi dameracnfai § fasrini WRT witarerenreaneart aI sifreateft arent amaruicant = reat gran fraracnrereanfartaon | STATS ATA, wiarearageyia: | C.Ci 30/232 -235 ~ Stanyavaha srotas gets vitiated by adoptation of follow- ing etiological factors— / ey e Consumption of food before the digestion of previous meal e Intake of unwholesome, irregular and improper foods e Excess consumption of food ¢ Excess consumption of salt, sour, pungent, alkaline and pasty food e Afflicted with both mental and physical miseries e Not. sleeping during night e Excessive worry e Suppression of natural urges and forceful elimination of unmanifested urges e Intake of milk and its products, rice with milk,. sweet ~ Srotas . “ 107 and its preparations, curd and its products followed by day: sleep : e Intake of meat of marshy, domestic and’ acquatic land animals : ya e Excess consumption of alcohol _ . e Lack of physical exercises and afflication with trauma and anger , . : © Emaciation due to chronic diseases -: eras araighs MA (Stanyavaha Srotodusti Laksana) Rar eahaster F 1 area GaragTa Ves Seahrenes | reareeTah rey we thera tire | warcale | C.Ci 30/236-238 Due to the consumption of nidana aggravated dosas reaches the stanyavaha srotas (galactic channels) and vitiate the breast milk and causes eight types of morbidity in stanya i.e. distasteful, frothy and ununctous due to vata dusti discolouration, foul smelling due to pitta dusti, unctous, slimy and heavy due to kapha dusti. ; tasqage Bat far (Diseases of Stanyavaha Srotas) Vataja Stanya dusti ~ Pittaja stanya.dusti Kaphaja stanya_dusti> 7 - Stanya ndadivrna \. Stana vidradhi _ WIsRag tay (Sabdavaha Srotas) Gal VeRaE A aguas fase 1 Ue vetonfadit asf afer a Tree . S.Ni 1/88 Aggravated vata enters Sabdavaha ‘srotas either alone or _ in association with kapha & produces hadhirya. - Diseases Badhirya
~ 108_ Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana Wide aT (Manovaha Srotas) Channels which carry the mana (mind) is called manovaha srotas. eiaife aataert eearfsean eet ert: | M.Ni 20/5 “eT (Root) ” @iaifa walaeriers gee der crake eran faster aaraat astafa | C.Ci 9/3 (Cakrapani) Manovaha srotas have their root in 10 vessels which are arising from heart and carry the mental stimulus to different parts of the body. Far (Etiological factors) fees gergfa wiser oenfor tee fierar sareequasdgal adisfirerdt fagagsa ater: | C.Ci 9/4 e Intake of unwholesome, polluted and uncleaned foods and drinks : . e Indulging in sinful acts by insulting gods, preceptors and intellectual individuals who are well versed in rituals. e Excessive fear and exhilaration Erratic behaviour Mind is afflicted by predominance of rajas and tamas. Aggravation and agitation in vatddi §aririka dosdas. Extreme emaciation e. Who is suffering from chronic disorders and suffering from ill health e Affliction of mind again and again by passion, anger, greed, excitement, fear, attachment, exertion, anxiety and grief @ When the body is subjected to excessive physical as- sault Te | C.Ni 7/4 Srotas 109 Due to above etiological factors mind gets severly affected and loses its intellect balance. At the same time aggravated dosas enter the Ardaya and obstruct the channels of mind & manifest unmdda. : areas Wem: | einicafirera wiaet weer ares St: 1 C.Ci 9/5 Due to the consumption of above etiological factors §aririka as well as manasika dosds become agitated and enter the Ardaya of the patient who is having inferior sarva and block the chan- nels of mind & manifest unmdda. Wiag Biefs AAT (Manovaha Srotodusti Laksana) rer eraeaehen’ fren f , C.Ni 7/5 Insanity is characterised by the perversion of mind, intel- lect, consciousness, knowledge, memory, desire, manners, behaviour and conduct. Tag eat face (Diseases of Manovaha Srotas) Unmada, kama, lobha, irsyd, cittodvega, harsa, krodha etc. AAMAS BNA (Sarijavaha Srotas) Channels which carry buddhi (intellect) is called sajnavaha srotas. ean gfe: | : C.Su 24/25 (Gafgadhara) . Et (Root) Hasta Haerghes: AAT | Maa MAGA AA Te | C.Su 24/25 (Garigadhara) taraaritft dare | C.Su 24/25 (Cakrapani) Samjravaha srotas have their root in Ardaya.
110 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijnana rer (Etiological factors) feaniattendteduratratend | The following factors manifest abnormality in mental func- tions leading to development of apasmara. e Improper or excess utilization or nonutilisation of sense. organs, intellectual blasphemy .and time. e Incompatible & impure diet and abnormal activities e Dosa aggravating factors e Suppression of natural urges e Intake of unwholesome and unclean feeds’ e@ Dominant rajo and tamo guna e Sexual intercourse during menstruation e Lust, fear, agitation, anger, grief, sorrow Rarae Bele carn (Symptoms of Disturbed Sarnjiiavaha srotas) away de: a avery aa: | wren: «oatag oat oma Saat fafioy were ou fafsergfaeien: | SAMY Gre a Get Farge: wee, fageth | aera ait ga: dal waa a: 1 Wistar | sfa whe: | S.Utt 61/8-10 When samjhiavaha srotas gets afflicted with dosds (both Saririka and manodosds) as a result person become sense- less due to disturbed mind leading to development of vio- Jent movements of the arms, legs, brows and eyes and grinds S.Utt. 61/4- 6 Srotas {11 teeth. Omit froath from mouth, falls on the ground with eyes wide open and regain consciousness after short period it is called apasmara. Diseases © Apasmara e Mada e Murccha e Sanyasa Talay Baints§ (Svaravaha Sretas) Channels which carry Sabda is called svaravaha srotas. Yet (Root) eraey aia: gf veenicty eeig, fares: 1 S§.Utt 53/3 (Dalhana) Svaravaha srotas have their root in Sabdavahi dhamani. ala: Y waaay UT ag EAT area wea, gre aT aufe | M.Ni 13/7 (Madhukosa) S.S@ 9/5 Svaravaha srotas are four in number i.e. two for speech and two for sounds. AEH (Etiological factors) areer wTaurfersrezerataattastte feta: — TATE | S.Utt 53/3 ‘The following factors brings vitiation in syaravaha_srotas. e Speaking with high pitched tone for longer duration ; © Consumption of poison Excess study Excess singing Intake of cold substances RGR eit wat (Svaravaha Sroto Dusti Laksana) ° ; Sit: BA warady Tear: visi wy: wat aaft wit fe wafer: G1 S.Urt 53/3
4 112 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Due to the consumption of above etiological factors ag- gravated and agitated vatadi dosds enters svaravaha srotas and destroy speech and voice. Diseases ® Vataja svarabheda Pittaja svarabheda Kaphaja‘svarabheda Sannipataja svarabheda Medaja svarabheda e Ksayaja svarabheda Critical Evaluation of the Sretas Introduction- The concept of srotas is defined vividly ‘and scientifically in Ayurvedic texts. It is stated that any corporeal entities do not arise or decay without srotas. It is defined as the transporting passages of dhdatus undergoing transformation. Caraka mentions that the person is the ag- gregate of srotas because of their pervasiveness and diffu- siveness that aggravate and pacify dosa. There are diver- gent openions regarding the number of srotas; some Say they are innumerable and to some they are numerable and de- scribes along: with classification in their respective samhita. It may be considered as the channels (micro and macro) on the. basis of morphology. The term srotas is derived from the root su sravano means that which exude; ooze; filter; permeate. These channels function as the medium through “which the biological materials, nutrients and excretables flow from and the kostha and the exterior. It refers both to the- gross major channels like respiratory tract, gastro intestinal tract, genitourinary tract, etc. micro channels like vessels, . capillaries, lymphatics, etc., and also to the molecular chan- nels like the permeability of membranous pores of cell mem~” brane, etc. It is the pre-requisite for the maintenance of good health because without healthy srotas body cannot grow normally. Srotas 113 Any slight disturbance at the level of srotas, either structur- ally or functionally, leads to sammurchana dosa and dusya and as a result disease manifests inside the body. Compe- tent srotas is the root cause for a healthy body; samsodhana therapy is recommended for removing the existing malas from the body and thereby maintains the healthy status of srotas. Synonyms— Sira (vein), dhamani (artery), rasadyani (lymphatic ducts), rasavahini (capillary), nadi (tubular con- duits), panthana (passages), m@rga (pathways, tracts), Sarirachidra (body orifices), samvrtasamrtani (open or blind passages), sthana (sites), a Saya (repertories) and niketa (re- sorts) are the synonyms of srotasas (channels). Structure— The orifices of the srotas are very small, wide, long and far, like those in the lotus stalk; through them, rasa ‘nourishes’ the body. The colour, and form of the srotas would be similar to the dhatu they transport; they may be cylindrical, ‘either sthula’ (gross, macroscopic) or anu (atomic or microscopic), dirgha (long) or prathana (reticu- lated). Importance-— 1. The indulgence of anomalous diet and activities leads to the abnormality in the srotas, which is the root cause for any disease; in other words, healthy srotas are the source of a good health. 2. The srotas subserve the needs of transportation. The dhatus transported through the srotas are constantly sub- jected to (metabolic) transformation. Without srotas no body-structure can grow and develop or waste and degener- ate. 3. Vata, pitta and kapha move through the srotas; all the channels of the body cater the needs for these move- ments. So long.as these channels of circulation perform their normal functions, body would be free from the dis- eases. 4. The abnormality in the dhatu brings about abnor-
114 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana mality in the srotas. The vitiated srotas further vitiate dhatu, as a vicious circle. All these are result due to the abnormal- ity of agni, thus, the lifespan, health, Strength, nourishment, etc., all are dependent on agni. 5, There is a separate chapter on srotas in the Caraka- Samhita, which signifies the importance of srotas. 6. There is as much diversity in the srotas as there is in the elements that compose the structure of the body. 7. The factors that cause prakopa (excitation) or Samana (alleviation) of dosa are being transported by- Srotas. 8. The channels of circulation carry the dh&tu (tissue- elements of their constituents) that are subjected to trans- formations. 9. As per the openion of the Salyatantra specialists, pains of special kinds, which may manifest on account of either the piercing of or injury to srotas that present in cer- tain special parts of the body, are important to gain knowl- edge of the prognosis of such conditions. 10. Kayacikitsa recognizes srotas that are spread throughout the body which include extremely tiny ones. Any pathological involvement of them may manifest subtle kinds of $ymptoms that may not be recognized or be of hetp in the asséssment of prognosis in such involvements. 11. These are channels of microscopic dimensions, which transport the body nutrients and through which the oozing of fluids takes place. 12. Rasa spreads throughout the body through very fine pores of srotas, which are distributed extensively in the body very much like the minute channels present in the lotus stem, 13. Srotas are two fold in nature i.e. serve as conduits through which both prasada (nutrient) dhatu as well as maladhatu (waste-products or products of degradation) are transported, and also serve as structures through the pores Srotas © 11S of which prasadadhatu and mala pass to and fro from the sthayidhatu. 14. The hrdaya, dhamani, stotas and Sirad (including ‘rasavaha srotas) constitute a single circulatory unit, which regulate the proper flow of blood and supply nutrition and clear of the waste products from sthayidhdatus. 15. Srotas include structures that secrete and-excrete like kidney tubules. 16. The nutrient substances nourish the dhatu under paka by the usma of dhatu. They are then made available to the dhatu through their own. srotas. 17. Srotas do not transport sthiradhatu but only the dhatu, which are undergoing metabolic transformations. The dhatu, which are formed consecutively, from the posakadhatu, are the sthayidhdtu. The nutrient material of a particular dhdtu does not nourish it through a srotas other than its own, because of the location of the posyadhatu, in different parts of the body. 18. Starling concept, which assumes the ultra filtration of blood constituents is modified to include the concept of a porous capillary wall, with pore numbers, dimensions and shapes varying in capillaries of diverse tissues and operation of a rapid diffusion process across the capillaries. 19. The theory of semi permeability may be well! corre- lated with srotas because of the property of being perme- able to some substances and impermeable to others. 20. If ion-concentration is greater on one side than the other, more ion On the average would migrate into the less diluted side, thus equalize concentrations. 21. There are 4 types of characteristic abnormalities that arise in the srotas viz. atipravrtti (an excess flow) or safga (obstruction) or vimargagamana (the flow of contents through channels other than its own) or sirdgranthi (any kinds of abnormal growths inside the vessels).
116 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 22. All pathological lesions, either acute or chronic, have their origin in the srotas. 23. Agnidusti or agnimandya of the cells that compose the srotas lead to Srotovaigunya or functional disturbance of the srotas, which may be followed by the structural change in them, this may in turn lead to srotorodha which in turn brings about an interaction between dos@ and dusya at the site of-the defect or arrest. Aetiological Factors for the Vitiation of Srotas ‘1. Food and activities aggravate the dosd and go con- trary to the well being of dhatu Vitiating the channels. 2. Day sleep and fatty foods have features identical to those of the fat; the former one vitiate the latter. Thus the term dhdtubhirviguna does not mean that food and regi- mens should attribute opposite to those of the d hatu, they only unwholesome for these dhatu. : Classification— Srotas are classified mainly into two groups viz. bahya and abhyantara srotas. Bahysrotasas— The srotas, which have opening outside and are seen (externally) with the naked eye are called bahyasrotas. Various acaryas classify these in different ways; according to Sugruta, it is 9 in male and 12 in female and’ to Sarafigadhara it'is 10 in male and 13 ‘in female. The bahirmukha srotas, which communicate with ex- ternal air are 9 in number i.e. ear - 2, eyes - 2, mouth - 1, nostrils - 2, anus - 1 and urethra - 1; in females, it is 13 i.e. Openings in the breast - 2 and vaginal. orifice - 1. Abhyantara Srotas— According to Caraka, yogavahi or abhyantara (internal orifices) are 13 in number with their opening inside. They are—pranavaha, annavaha, udakavaha, rasavaha, raktavaha, mamsavaha, medovaha, asthivaha, majjavaha, sukravaha, purisavaha, mitravaha and svedavaha. SuSruta doesn’t included asthivaha, majjavaha and svedavaha srotas but included drtavavaha srotas. Srotas . ( 117 Conclusion— The role of srotas in the maifestation of disease is weli discussed in almost all Ayurvedic texts; so also its importance in the maintenance of normal physiologi- cal functions i.e. the basis for good health. A complete knowledge of srotas is a ‘must for an Ayurvedic physician to approach a patient-in a holistic way. Manifestation of a disease occurs in the body as a result of the defective srotas of the body. So any defect of srotas must be corrected quickly, for the restoration of normal health. Here a collective approach of the views of various acaryas regarding. srotas is specified. Table 1 : Srotas-Modern correlation - Cardio-Respiratory System 2. Udakavaha srotas Portal vein and thoracic duct 3. Annavaha srotas Gastro Intestinal tract 4. Rasavaha srotas * Lymphatics and Cardiovascular system 5. Raktavaha srotas Circulatory system including liver and spleen : Capillaries supplying the muscles 7. Medovaha srotas Capillaries supplying the muscles 8. .Asthivaha srotas Capillaries going to bone mar- ° Ow 9. Majjavaha srotas Bone marrow pores 10. Sukravaha srotas. Reproductive system including seminiferous tubules and ducts deferens : 11. Mutravaha srotas Urinary system 12. Purisavaha srotas 13. Svedavaha srotas Ducts of sebaceous glands 14. Artavavaha srotas Female reproductive system | including uterine vessels
118 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiina 15. Stanyavaha srotas _.| Tubules of lactiferous ducts 16. Manovaha srotas Nervous system along with its nerve supply 17. Vatavaha srotas Nervous. pathway 18. Samjfavaha srotas Sensation carrying pathways 22. Pittavaha Srotas 24. Sarvavaha Srotas . : Chapter 7 — ferareHTe (Kriyakala) The concept of kriyGkala has been widely described in two separate entities as rtu kriyakala and vyadhi kriyakala. Under rtu kriyakGla normal physiological variations of dosa in respec- tive season has been discussed and accordingly certain mea- sures are described in ytucarya to overcome the adverse ef- fects. Vyadhi kriyakdla described by Sugruta gives an idea about the consecutive stages of the disease and accordingly preven- tive measures: were described to over come complications. Early: diagnosis of disease helps to cure the disease successfully with- out much discomfort in planning treatment. If physician able to detect the changes in early stages like sancaya (accumulation), prakopa etc. based on the manifestation of dosa symptomatology and advises the technique at that stage to pre-- vent further stages, so that disease may not become stronger. calla fieatnte (Vyadhi Kriyakala) _ It is the process of understanding the pathogenesis of dis- ease in consecutive stages. : waa a wad ua wat wre! pate Ae a a aha atari a wafeTR 11 S.Su 21/36 Mainly 6 stages were described for the successive mani- festation of the disease i.e. sancaya, prakopa, prasara, sthana samésraya, vyakti and bheda, : _ deasuga seat era Ahr AA: | aq garg wag waht sera: 11 If accumulated dosa has been eliminated it won’t manifest successive stages of kriyakala. If not eliminated, it passes to next stages. As the disease advances to latter stages it becomes stronger and stronger for management: ~- S.Su 21/36
120 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana war (Sancaya) Peferear qkavers: | S.Su 21/18 (Dathana) Gradual accumulation of dosa in respective seats. It is the first stage of kriyakala. vem ffrarenret: ie: arufeert: | (Dalhana) It is the early stage to plan the suitable preventive mea- sures, Tn ay sacar; Uy deters et: | wep Gea AGE: | wa Chaat aq sere Maerquintea Caressa wate AEA aitterneted wre ero fasayaa fergie wate wea were fererentet: | S.Su 21/18 Dosa is going to accumulate in their respective seats and causes for accumulation of dosa has been described else where in this book. Accumulated dosa manifests certain symptoms are as follows. arent AAW (Vata Sancaya Laksana) e Stiffness and fullness in abdomen feaAAA HIT (Pitta Sancaya Laksana) * Yellowishness. of body parts e Mild increase in body temperature pata Mat (Kapha Sancaya Laksana) e. Heaviness in whole body e@ Lassitude S.Su 21/18 Person develops aversion towards the causative factors which are responsible for accumulation of dosa. Went (Prakopa) facrrt em af: vain; S.Su 21/18 (Dalhana) Accumulated dosa moving to other sites other than its main site. S| i f ( ‘Kriyakala 121 Tada: ferarenrer ofa fiettafvafacenreen: | S.Su 21/27 (Dathana) It is the second stage of kriyakala and also second stage for preventive measures. TaN Tataee at Fe: ? seat wares alte: sareaest ayrat aur fat WaT: S.Su 21/32 (Dalhana) What is the difference between prakopa and prasara? After * heating thick ghee (solid) it melts, it is the prakopa stage. On further heating of melted ghee produces froathing and reaches top of the heating utensil or comes out of utensil is called prasara stage. wet wala aledteceronfers frora ufterrmay Beara Brea | wear ferita: fearenret: | S.Su 21/27. The following symptomatology manifest in prakopa stage as per the involvement of dosa are as follows— alt Watt HAUT (Vata Prakopa Laksana) e Pain and movement of vata in maha srotas (Wamfufa are ara oftanmfrcad: (Dathana) fora senta mart (Pitta Prakopa Laksana) e Sour eructations (Stitt STE: ) e Burning sensation all over the body (Uftelg: Wat ae:) e Excessive thirst ww WRG MAW (Kapha Prakopa Laksana) e Aversion to food e Excessive salivation in mouth (@@alactel Beene: ) WAX (Prasara stage) ad Sea vat aaa: erage: wefan faodienfie- 10 Vik. & Roga
122 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiéna & Roga Vijfiana ara satire wet wate det arian waror 2q: wearers | a fe Tait yes: tape verde aederarmn | ae Henenteistire: Ayracratatuieas catia: wea: senate, Wa de: Hafsean feet: wae: viforrafee atsAmwen waTha | waar ard: firt yeton sifind arafirt arayetenut, feareetorait arasnitrea Rarenfine verre araitragnfirats aragcreryitornhs, firesetrenttrans aria: arated samira; wal weap werkt | S.Su 21/28 Overflowing of dosa from their respective seats to other places. takes place like fermented materials comes out after keep- ing mixture of yeast, water and flour in a vessel for overnight. Main factor for movement is vayu because of being mobile even though capricious. It is predominant in rajas which is initiator of all happenings. As a large accumulation of water in excess breaks the barrier and mixes other pool of water and moves hapazardly in various directions. In the same way dosa also moves to different places with the help of vayu either alone or in combinations are as follows and it is of 15 types. UBER WAC (15 type of Prasara) \. Vata prasara 2. Pitta prasara 3. Kapha prasara 4. Rakta prasara 5. Vata pitta prasara 6. Vata kapha prasara 7. Pitta kapha prasara 8. Vata rakta prasara 9. Pitta rakta prasara 10. Kapha rakta prasara 11. Vata pitta rakta prasara 12. Vata kapha rakta . . prasara 13. Pitta kapha rakta prasara 14. Vata pitta kapha 15. Vata pitta kapha rakta prasara prasara Pesisars ashe ang pled yerr det feat safer ques adie | arest pftagentta cit arty fresh fraveites: warert VAAL epeate S.Su 21/29-30 Kriyakala 123 Aggravated dosa moves all over the body and manifest diseases wherever they struck i.c. whole body, half portion of the body, part of the body like cloud rains in sky. If the aggravation of dosa is mild it may not produce dis- eases because it stays in hidden channels and produces dis- eases if preventive measures not undertaken and after consum- ing causative factors in excess. qureif fers, steranfaaraprerareteseta yersratt fergih waa; at dete: faratentet: | S.Su 21/32 Aggravated dosa spreads to different places and produces following symptomatology are as follows— ald Wat CVT (Vata Prasara Laksana) e Vata moves to different places other than its own seats. (ope argamiesh fear: ) e Painful sensation in mahdsrotas (are wags es ) fa WAL MAT (Pitta Prasara Lakyana) Localised burning sensation (ats us eft <e:) Sucking type of pain (SYS: yet FF deat fast) Burning sensation all over the body Emitting smoke from mouth (Yared yalgrafire) Sh WAT av (Kapha Prasara Laksana) e Anorexia e Indigestion e Lassitude « Vomiting aa Wet araienneda egomarc, es S.Su 21/32 (Dalhana) Hetu linga cikitsad is advised in prasaravasthd, later vyadhicikitsa.
124 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana TAMARA (Sthanasaméraya stage) WEA Yala ailtaywas wy: AT LAG: | S.Su 21/33 -(Dalhana) Agitated dosa spreads to different places and struck some- where because of obstruction in srotas due to abnormality in srotas is called sthana sam$raya. BA Hed TUTGTS eA: | Wet wep frarenieary reheat Tika Coney sraht | a adler irae gellar aan yeataRey- quraaqre frefsantrane waiteraba; after: werertyararct eats sania; Agen Preamayinds yee way; Wea Tastes ayy, orfernn fagerqeret wydta; orem: jaar dffeert yea meata:; a oftet aera: | at qeeunaty age: firaere: 11 S.su 21/33 Agitated and disturbed dosa moving all over the body and produces diseases when favourable environment was developed for dosa-dusya sammirchana due.to unheathiness of srotas in a particular site resuting into manifestation of diseases. Udara~ Dosa-dusya sammirchana in-udara manifests fol- lowing diseases—gulma, vidradhi, udara roga, agni vikara, vibandha, anaha, visicikd, atisdra, pravahika, vilambika etc. Bastigata— When there is a dosa-dusya sammirchana in basti region produces following diseases—prameha, asmari, mutraghata, mitra dosa etc. Medhragata-— Dosa-dusya sammurchana in medhra pradesa manifests following diseases—Niruddhaprakaésa, upadamsa, Suka dosa etc. Gudagata— Dosa-dusya sammiurchana in guda region manifests following diseases—Bhagandara, ara ete. Kriyakala 125 Vrsanagata— Vrddhi disease manifests. ; Ordhvajatrugata— Manifest urdhvajatru gata vikara. Tvak, Mamsa and Sonitagata— WH Vedat Tet faafera: 1 (Dalhana) Rasa is considered in place of tvak because any changes happening in rasa are expressed in skin. Diseases are— ksudraroga, kustha, visarpa etc. Medagata-— Disease are—Granthi, apaci, arbuda, galaganda, alaji etc. Asthigata— Diseases are—Asthi vidradi. Padagata~ Disease are—Slipada, vatasonita, vatakantaka etc. Sarvangagata— Diseases are—-Jvara, vatavyadhi, prameha, pandu roga, Sosa etc. In this particular stage of kriyakala premonitory signs and symptoms of the diseases are seen. aq: frarntet sia agaiivaterccrea:: farfacet art deer qerer Aqsa | S:Su 21/33 (Dathana) It is the fourth stage of kriyakala and treatment must be employed to correct dosa, dusya or both. CHIaACA (Vyaktavastha) eafa: weak wo caf: 1 S.Su 21/34 (Dalhana) Appearance of clear cut symptoms of the disease. ara Hed aeadsht aaa: vitae safest fad waft Wer Matera vectra wayetat at | at car: ferarearer: 11 S.Su 21/34 Cardinal signs and symptoms of the diseases are expressed in this stage. For example— dard Ta F:- Increased temperature is observed in jvara.
126 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiiana wT s feranr— Excessive passing of watery stools is seen in atisara. Woreemryetsfa- Abnormal enlargement of abdomen is observed in udara roga. aa one: weitere fafeeen 1 S.Su 21/34 (Dalhana) Vyadhi pratyanika cikitsa (treatment mentioned in respec- tive diseases for their management) may be adopted. We (Bhedavastha) S.Su 21/35 In case of vrnds they burst and become ulcers. Certain diseases attain chronicity i.e. Jirna jvara, pravrddha amavata etc, Dirghakdlanubandha refers to two meaning i.e.— In this stage specific signs and symptoms of the diseases manifests like vataja jvara laksana, pittaja jvara laksana etc. and also it refers to chronicity of the diseases. This particular stage of manifestation is very difficult to cure and if not treated at the earliest disease may become incurable. . Req feearentet (Ru Kriyakéla) aaranraen: frais BAHAR | Team: way acramerney 1 S.Su 17/114 Seasonal variation of dosa occurs in respective seasons like accumulation of dosa, agitation of dosa and alleviation of dosa takes place in subsequent rtus. Wa (Caya) ; wat gfe: waaeaa weet gfe tag fede qtest a A.Hr.Su 12/22 Kriyakala 127 Increase of dosa in its own place and manifest dislike for things which are responsible for accumulation and likes the opposite qualities of substances. wld (Kopa) aioegarinfirar 1 Spreading of dosa to different places and manifests symp- toms of aggravated dosa like vdta prakopa laksana, pitta prakopa laksana and kapha prakopa laksana. Patient may feel ill health and disease may manifest if not managed properly with preventive measures. In this particular stage initially dosa variation symptoms arise, if not taken care at this stage it mani- fests premonitory signs and symptoms of the disease or even attain chronicity. , WSF & YA (Prasama or Sama) RUM TT aS: VT: | A.Ar.Su 12/23 Dosa attain normalcy in their respective seats and disease will not manifest. auifay q frees, yererur: ferret AHr.su 12/24-25 Caya, prakopa and prasama of vata dosa occurs in three seasons commencing with grisma. araniier wa:, arg weata:, wee 3erA: | (3m. %) Ta yey TTA oa] (Grisma) | -(Varsda) (Sarad) In case of pitta it commences with varsa apg wa:, eRe wely:, SAT FRA: 1 (ST. ‘A.Hr.Su 12/23
128 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana a in (Caya) (Prakopa) | (Pragama) ‘nn (Varsa) (Sarad) (Hemantha) For kapha it starts with Sifira feet aa: aaed seta: Ast wea: | (3M. z) a | eat art alas (Sisira) (Vasantha) pate 1 aicceiaaenfrieetirves areem 1 first anf at aitd 7 Y Brere ieee: | ete frepfinirecatafaha: aa: 1 qeasfir wrlet ao a eHaeaa wept | A.Hr.Su 12/25-27 Vata increases during grisma riu due to usage of things possessing qualities such as laghu, ruksa etc. in the bodies of persons possessing such qualities but it does not undergo prakopa due to the presence of heat in abundance. Pitta undergo caya in varsa ytu-due to production of amla vipaka of water and foods but does not undergo prakopa due to coldness. Kapha dosa accumulates in excess in SiSira rtu due to the consumption of foods and drinks which are snigdha and Sita in nature and body of person of similar nature and it does not become prakopa due to solidification. sf Srerearets orrereearerega: | were ata welsh aer: wrist at a a1 A.Hr.Su 12/28 Caya, prakopa and prasSama are the normal physiological effects on the dosa due to seasons, foods, nature etc. and there may. not be caya, prakopa and praSama may not occur in respec- tive seasons. e Chapter 8 eater (Vyadhi) wea Ga Tan carers sea | (S.Su 1/23) Manifestation of discomfort to the body is called Vyadhi. E.G wrap arat cist | S.Su 1/23 (Dathana) Dukha may pertain to body, speech and mind. Vyadhi is defined as the conjunction of living being with pain. autfas dager weqear faviet | wale wat eat: Tenratyerecaaa: 1 M.vi 1/7 (Madhukosa) Vyadhi manifests due to dosa-dusya sammurchana as a result jvaradi diseases are going to manifest inside the body by producing symptoms like anorexia, temperature etc. Classification of Vyadhi , Caraka classified the vyddhi into different categories. He also suggested that newer classification group may be made if any. Diseases are only one because pain is the common mani- ‘festation in all types of diseases. Individuals are free to classify th disease as they like. If something has been already described in any group, the same may be reclassified and regrouped by giving different justification. Sometimes the same term may carry different meanings, for example the word ‘roga’ denotes disease as well as dosa. carte wate (Synonyms of Vyadhi) ot: wren sett earfizfela F:aArT: | BaeNeTaeN: wet: wafaefea: tt 9 AHr.Ni 1/1 da soferrrat we sash Beat sath repre Tht Sea C.Ni 1/5 Vyadhi, Gmaya, gada, Gtanka, yaksma, jvara, vikdra and roga are the synonyms of vyadhi.
130 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana wart fe Urged dag a eahag a; ster wis Vereen wares ahanspheryred ferenrcgreg TMA, aera TST TTS waned cheamepfererey fran a Ma aa tay Se enfirg Tt Tyre: War: Vey _ faytearq C.Vi 6/4 The same term may carry different meanings, e.g. the word roga denotes both the dosa as well as diseases. Similarly vari- ous terms which are synonymous may denote only one thing, €.g. roga, Gtanka, yaksma, dosaprakrti (having polluting na- ture) and vikara (morbidity-these terms carry the meaning of or synonymous with both dosa and vya@dhi (disease). Thus the term roga is synonymous with both the dosa and vyadhi (dis- ease). For the rest like hetu (etiology) etc., this term, viz. roga carries a different meaning. 1. Vyadhi aan a fafadt g:cereedifa cake: 1 Cakrapani ; Which produces various kinds of discomfort and unhap- piness to both mind and body is called vyadhi. 2.. Amaya WOT GRaAS Te | Cakrapani Most of the diseases may arise due to dma that’s why it is called amaya. . 3. Atanka aig sit gaat passitat mite | Cakrapéni Individual suffering from disease with ‘pain leads displea- sure life is called dtanka. 4. Yaksma Fayed B Usa Bee Rrra asta 1 Cakrapani 4 Like Rajayaksma conglomeration of diseases arises in some iseases. Vyadhi 131 5. Jvara TACT WU CENA: TANT BC | Cakrapani Which induces warmness to both body and mind is called Jvara. 6. Vikara fant VIRT BPRS STATA | Cakrapani Changes effected by the diseases, both in body as well as mind. 7. Roga Wye wd wT! Cakrapani Which gives pain to body is called roga. 8. Papma areafer finet aa Te: arrest Heo: Herter Great aaEAe | Sarvaéngasundara All the diseases manifest due to sinful acts done’ by the individual is called papma. 9, Gada . Te Fa Wal SAHA | Aa fe Tats PHATE AT Tratstitfea wWeyTereae: | Sarvangasundara Poison manifests by combination of many factors in the same way vyddhi manifests due to various factors. Disturbed dosa, dusya, agni etc. produces hazardous effects like poison, that's why it is called gada (Gada means poison). 10. Abadha Sarvangasundara During disease state person will be afflicted with various kinds of pain to both body and mind as a result normally these will have an impact on the functions of both body and mind resulting in abnormal activities. aa aarrisufteetar vara, siege | C.Vi 6/5
132 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiina Diseases are innumerable based on their multifactorial nature. One type of Vyadhi A. @:@ TAIT | Discomfort is common in all types of Vyadhi. C. GB TTT | C.Su 20/03 Pain is common manifestation in all varieties of Vyadhi. Two types of diseases C.Vi 6/03 Sadhya A. Prabhava bheda Asadhya Mrdu B. Bala bheda Daruna Sariradhisthana C. Adhisthana bheda NAA Manoadhisthana Sastra sadhya D. Kriya bheda Snehadi kriya Sadhyascha (S.Su 24/3) Svadhatu vaisamya nimittaja E. Nimitta bheda Agantu nimittaja Amaésaya samutha F. ASaya bheda : NA A Pakvasaya samuttha Svatantra (purvarupa) G. Svatantradi bheda /\ Paratantra (upadrava) Three Types of Diseases Karana bhéda— 1. A. Nija Marga bheda— A.S.Su 22/9 Dosa bheda C.Ni 1/4 Adhyatmikadi bheda- Vyadhi 133 B. Agantu C.Su 11/45 C. Manasa A. Drsta karmaja B. Adrsta karmaja A.Hr.Su 12/57 'C. Drstadrsta karmaja A. Bahya (Sakhagrita roga marga) B. Madhyama (Marmasthi sandhigata roga) C. Abhyantara (KosthaSrita) A. Agneya (Pitta) B. Saumya (Kapha) C. Vayavya (vata) wea @:@ fifaer srenirnn, anfiritfrany, onfiretfea- fafa it Karma bheda— A.S.Su 22/]1-2 Karma bheda- A.S.Su 22/1-2 Karma bheda— A.H.Su 12/58 : S.Su 24/4 . Adhyatmika . Adi daivika . Adi bhautika ADD . Pratyutpanna karmaja . Purva karmaja . Ubhayadtmaka AWD . Purvakarmaja Pratyutpanna karmaja . Parabhi samskaraja Aw > . Dosaja . Karmaja . Dosa karmaja AW p>
134 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiina Aupasargikadi bheda- A. Aupasargika A.Su 35/18 B. Prakkevala C. Anya laksana Four Types of Roga’s i) Agantuja roga ii) Sariraja roga iii) Manasa roga iv) Svabhavik roga i) -Sukha sadhya roga ii) Krechra sadhya roga iii) Yapya roga iv) Anupakrama (pratyakhyeya) roga Five Types of Roga i) Vataja vikara ii) Pittaja vikadra iii) Kaphaja vikara iv) Sonitaja vikara v) Sannipataja vikara Seven Varieties of Diseases ay waae erengqutcate 1 3 qa: SEIT CATE: NeTT- Ses: TAaeMETA:, seaewee: SISNET, AACE, TaRaaeGM Sit tl S.Su 24/4 Adi bala Pravrtta vyadhi i Janma bala pravrtta vyadhi iii) Desa bala pravrtta vyadhi iv) Kala bala pravrtta vyadhi v) Daiva bala pravrtta vyadhi vi) Svabhava bala Ppravrita vyadhi vii) Sanghata bala pravrita vyadhi Seven Varieties of Vyadhi i) Sahaja roga ii) Garbhaja roga S.Su 1/02 S.Su. 1/22 C.Su 10/9-10 Vyadhi 135 ili) Jataja roga iv) Pidaja roga v) Kalaja roga vi) Prabhavaja roga vii) Svabhavaja roga Ta TM: MAMA S MARTA AT HATTA | AAISE: TM: WUeTHTa ward ayeiayaya | Fat T A.S.Su 22/1-2 whegerathar: aes ctesfa waraaftent careret feferfen: | Gants 1 deren: yehsu ta: | somata | AIMS AITO TAAAT | A.S.Su 22/10 Diseases may manifest independently or as a secondary to other disease known respectively as anubandhya (primary) and anubandha (secondary). Anubandhya is independent and has specific well defined features, causes and diagnosis. Anubandha is dependent and doesn’t have its own clinical features, causes and: diagnosis, which is divided into two namely purogami or purvarupa and anug&mi or upadrava. sat tan sft Farr’ aren: | at fet: uiterer:, arAiinias arataimenne WaeI:, ATE: Tae TTC Peeasreard | C.Su 11/45 Mainly diseases manifest due to three regions namely en- dogenous (nija), exogenous (4gantuja) and psychological (manasa). Nija diseases are those which arise due to disturbed vatadi dosa, Ggantu vikara’s manifest due to effect of devil, poisons, air, fire and fight. Manasa diseases arises due to asso- ciation with the agreeable and nonagreeable things. Three Varieties of Diseases” 1 smeatferen camfet (Adhyatmika Vyadhi) — arafira arate: PRAT TAT SreaTiHT: | oe STH careht anearet aT Meeeaferny | | S.Su 24/4 (Dalhana) | Adhyatmika means diseases manifesting due to involve- ment of vata, pitta and kapha dosa along with raja and tamo manasa dosa. \t means relating to self or one’s own soul.
136 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Ue sreaifarent sf wa omfeeret Wea SAAT WE shrsret Waa: | . S.Su 24/05 (Dalhana) Adibala pravrtta, janmabala Pravrtta and dosabala pravrtta vyadhi comes under Gdhydatmika. arentwen: witeranne ta: myfa ate aera | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana} Diseases manifest by involving vatadi Saririka dosa along with raja and tamodosa. a) Seaer Wat SAA: (Dosa Bala Pravrtta Vyadhayah) Qe ae va 4 sagen frenenrancpaya; asfafgen: STTRTS CM: Vera Tes: Wa fixer: wet APS | S.Su 24/5 Dosa bala pravytta vyadhi’s are those manifest due to dis- turbed Saririka and manasa dosa. For the genesis of dosa bala Pravrtta vyédhi’s causative factors ‘are incompatible dietetic and erratic activities. It is sub-divided into Gmasaya samuttha and pakvdSaya samuttha. Again subdivided into saririka and manasika. STAR UT:, Be whrvaraey eres: Bra arr seme | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) The word Gtanka means roga, which gives displeasure to the body and create uncomfortness to the individuals. For ex- ample— Pratisydya manifests kasa. Kasa manifests ksaya etc. FaeaER (Mithyahara) frearere fererftonfirfer free arqferd: 1 s.Ni 1/4 (Dathana ) Improper and incompatible adaptation of dietetics is called mithyahara. Vyadhi 137 M.Ni 2/2 (Madhukosa) One who doesn’t follow the rules and regulations of astavidha ahara visesadyatana’s (8 fold dietetic regulations) properly is called mithyahdra, excluding raéi. faearant (Mithyacara) .oo. feercontata freensraferd: 1 S.Ni 1/41 Improper erratic behaviour is called mithyacara. faen: ararseat cama¢: | S.Ni 1/40-41 Improper and contrary activities related to physical, speech and mind are called mithyacara. faeces freranagracrrrane | M.Ni 2/2 (Madhukosa) mee BAT AM ASAMATARA: | A.Hr.Ni 5/4 (Sarvangasundara) Incorrect, improper, wrongly behaviour of the individual in respect to. physical, speech and mind. For example— Weak person fighting against strong person. Speaking too much, excessive worries etc. BMI ATA (Amasaya Samuttha) aTaTsTa Wyeast serrata saat: wel ret: Were t C.Vi 6/3 (Cakrapani) The diseases arises by kapha and pitta dusti takes shelter in amasaya and all kapha-pittaja vikara comes under this. Ex- ample— e Prameha e Rajayaksma e Amlapitta e Raktapitta e Pandu e Kamala etc. UsaTa AYA (Pakvasaya Samuttha) CEA UIA WUT Te ARAM: | C.Vi 6/3 (Cakrapani) 11 Vik. & Roga
138 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiana All vdtaja diseases takes shelter.in pakvasSaya and all vataja vikara’s' are comes under this. YR (Sarira) arafart vero Gq PR er: aera a erarTTTTAT Vie vila vara AE Pes: | C.Vi. 6/5 Vata, pitta and kapha are three SGrira dosa. Diseases mani- fest due to vatadi dosa \ike jvara, atisara,:Sopha, Sosa, $vasa, meha, kustha etc. come under Sarira roga. e 80 types of vataja nanatmaja vikara © 40 °° " pittaja Pe . © 20 * * kaphaja » > e 10 ’' " raktaja a ” A.S.Su 20/12 S.Pratham khanda 7/125-127) Totally 1120 diseases manifest because of abnormal dosas (S.Su 24/8 Dalhana) AMa (Manasa) THES Bal set ceifsenre: area sales Tita Beer * vite fantan wa gute: | C.Vi. 6/5 Raja and tama are two manasika dosa and diseases mani- fest due to their abnormality are comes under mdnasa vikara. Examples Kama (passion) Lobha (greed) Irsya (envy) Mada (narcosis) Cittodvega (excitement) Harsa (exhilaration) Sq (Ubhaya) was: Hae: Wiest sees: safer SAAT: t S.Su 1/26 (Dalhana) Krodha (anger) Moha (confusion) Mana (conceit) Soka (anxiety) Bhaya (fear) Vyadhi 139 Krodhadi vikards are those manifest due to morbidity in manas and jvaradi rogas manifest due to affliction of vatadi dosa and apasmdaradi roga’s manifest by afflicting both Saririka and mdnasika dosa. Importance of Vatadi Dosa in the Manifestation of Diseases weet a eaftat araitrryetsror wa Wet S.Su 24/8 Vata, pitta and kapha are the main root or the base for the initiation of all pathogenetic events, because of having their symptoms, their subsidance and scriptural evidence. As the entire creation existing as universe is never distinct from satva, rajas and tamas, the entire group of disorders present in differ- ent forms does not exist without vata, pitta and kapha. Variations are due to combination of dosa, dhdtu and mala; specific sites and etiological factors; to dhatu, vitiated excessively by dosa, nomenclature is given like rasaja, raktaja etc. PRR arated eee viftra aio sara Fir: | S.Su 1/24 (02) Improper usage of foods and drinks manifests vdtaja, pittaja, kaphaja, Sonitaja and sannipataja vyadhi. ater wa fe ad Tier | 7 fe sao ferreefeait We aya 1 A.S.Su 22/10 (Indu) Dosas are the main factors in the development of disease process. Without the involvement of vatddi dosa diseases won’t manifest. vaferemt afirpite: yap ada wef: yaar ae agt weed argent usfaait arrat faenret tanh oO C.Su. 20/9 Vata, pitta, kapha spreaded all over the body and manifest A.S.Su 22/10
140 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiina good or bad consequences in the entire body when during nor- malcy or aggravation. Equilibrium state of dosa manifests good consequences like development, strength, complexion, cheer- fulness etc. During their abnormal state manifest diseases. at: GreiLaraitcenn: awake: wise vata, fapfeaarg aq arifattaent: sritcqaamatar ) | C.vi. 1/5 Vata, pitta and kapha are three Saririka dosa and perform all normal physiological functions of the body during their nor- malcy and becomes non conducive during their disequilibrium state. dents far (Samsargaja Vikara) Diseases may manifest by involving two or more dosa is ‘called samsargaja. Dosa may unite with dhatu, mala etc, and manifest various diseases and accordingly nomenclature was given. For Example— Vatadi dosa + Rasadhatu > Jvara Vatadi dosa + Rasadhatu + Purisa > Atisara Vatadi dosa + Rasadi dusya + Mitra + 20 types of Prameha Vatadi dosa + Raktadhatu + Vatarakta, Raktapitta, Vidradhi, Rakta Gulma S.Su: 24/8 (Dalhana) b) SAAT Wert SaTfet (Janma Bala Pravrtta Vyadhi) SAAT TAM AGA CNIS THAT TARTT TATA wired asf fafeen: cape: searrart Pare | S.Su 24/5 Janmabala prayrtta disease occur due to unwholesome behaviour of the mother during conception and pregnancy. As a result the following diseases manifest namely lameness, blind- ness, deafness, muteness, nasal voice, dwarfness etc. by birth. This is again subdivided into two kinds i.e. i) Rasa krta—due to rasa Vyadhi : 141 ii) Dauhrdapacaraja—non fulfillment of longings during pregnancy . THe Tae Stet Yow Viet fs ferishe aque: | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) Janmabala pravrtta vyadhi’s are those manifest without the affliction of Sukra Sonita but results due to improper con- duct and dietetics. ATM Blt TIENTaTayee: | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) Consumption of improper diet during conception and preg- nancy along with erratic behaviour leads to mdnifestation of janmbala pravrtta vyadhi. deaentHeeatt walgwrarngreaqaie wrafeartxaret wear dean, saraad Terence deeteranreay seanbra weet arfearfed at | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) Dauhrdé& means performing prayer for the pleasure of senses from the date of conception to till the 4th month of preg- nancy. Any misbehave during this period leads to janmabala pravrtta vy@dhi. ce) snfeact wast enfét (Adibala Pravrtta Vyadhi) wa, sifeaet vam a yen. duran: Horsf wyaa:; asta fafaer: crasm:, frgsrsa (S.Su 24/5 Adibala pravrtta diseases are those manifest due to mor- bidity of Sukra and Sonita. For example kustha, arga etc. It is subdivided into two varieties namely matrja and pitrja. Qeevifine cera: yeenfirafeers arate eta aa: | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) Vitiation of §ukra and Sonita by vatadi dosa manifest adibala pravrtta vyadhi. rare wyaa:—waferieoMTrAe AAA: 1 S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana)
42 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana Prameha, ksaya also comes under this group. MSAMGM FE UwBMot eM: 1 S.Su 24/5 (Dathana) Afflicted Sukra and fonita brings abnormalities in individu- als through their inherent impure properties. Tiger git ag: yitforas: S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) Matrja refers to mother’s Sonita dusti janya vikara. fagsrsatfa fig: gem: | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) These are derived from father’s sukra. ir anfavifttes (Adibhautika) a) Wantact Wa (Sanghata Bala Pravrtta Vyadhi) PUMA TAM S ata ger actafemery; Aste feeren: WeAM caesar | wa sree: 1 S.Su 24/6 Sanghdta bala pravrtta vyadhi’s are those diseases which manifest due to assault to weak person by stronger person. It is subdivided into Sastrakrta and vyala krta. Sastrakrta vyadhi’s are those manifest due to injury by various weapons/surgery. MAK sia ATT FFIMMTA: | SS 24/5 (Dalhana) Vyalakrta are the diseases manifests due to fierce or wild animals like wicked tiger. i ane tan eater (Adidaivika Vyadhi) a) Hletaet WEA Cale (Kalabala Pravytta Vyddhi) DIMAS TAM A vikttoraraaahas wyfakrerm: ; Asher fen: ATA THM:, AACA HAPT | S.Su 24/7 Kalabala pravrtta vyddhi’s occur due to effect of cold, heat, wind, sunlight etc. It is divided into two kinds i.e. vyapannartukrta and avyadpannartukrta. aalet itcitorr ad Tia: AEG: 1 S.Su 24/7 (Dalhana) Kalabala pravrtta diseases evolving out of variation in Vyadhi 143° various seasons like rainy season, summer, winter. Diseases may arise from normal’as well as abnormal seasons. Diseases are its daha, kampa, vrna and jvara etc. TIAA seraitescaMayea SSA: sori dhifsrearat saa 1 S.Su 6/15 Avyapanna rtus are those in which seasen is not deranged, the herbs grow unaffected and water is free from contamination. This tu promotes viiality, longevity, strength, energy and ‘ojus. aie: Teatiad Tea Ee: | S.Su 24/5 (Dalhana) Oja is situated in hrdaya and it is the essence of all 7 dhatus. AMAIA ya | S.Su 6/16 Vyapanna rtukrta is a condition manifest due to deranged seasons, it results due to unseen factor. Diseases arises due to abnormal cold, heat, air and rains. Water and herbs are adversely affected and are not useful for usage. By their use there may be appearance of various diseases or epidemics leading to death of mass people. b) @aaet weaut Ca (Daivabala Pravrtta Vyadhi). aaae vam sfa tagiie HEM FAA: | S.Su 24/7 (Dalhana) Daivabala pravrtta vyadhi occurs due to supernatural powers Raat agar a taaterefrgrrear Heirs saeTive; Ws fe fafeen: faqaripa:, frerniepae, Gara fafaen decison STEATET- HTS | S.Su 24/7 (Dalhana) Daivabala pravrtta vyadhi’s are caused by curses of hu- miliated divine beings, curse of sages, Atharvan rites (magic spell) and calamities or contagious diseases from. other person. It is divided into two types i.e. Vidhyudasani kyta aid pisacadi krta. Again subdivided into samsargaja and akasmikasca. soenisn oft Sager ST: Wifsasmreridiert sae: S.Su 24/7-(Dalhana)
144 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Upasargaja vyadhi’s are those manifest due to close assosiation with diseased persons. Vidhyudasani krta occur due to lightening, thunderbolt etc. Pisacadi kta are those, manifests due to evil Spirits. tents (Samsargaja) _ Aenisn gf terfestensmeiacher seri: 1 s.su 24/7 (Dalhana) Residing with persons who are cursed by almighty god. aTrenfara (Akasmika) S.Su 24/7 (Dalhana) These are the manifestations results suddenly without any apparent cause. c) AMAT TFA SAULT (Svabhava Bala Pravrtta Vyadhi) WaMaae we a gaara ar wera; asf fer: HIST, SAITATPa; Ta Ufa: sATeT:, safe TaTEAT ‘STH: | S.Su 24/7 (Dalhana) Svabhava bala pravrtta vyadhi’s are those manifest natu- rally like hunger, thirst, old age, death, sleep etc. It is divided into two kinds i.e. kdlaja and akalaja. KGlaja vyadhi’s are those manifests due to time factor inspite of taking all precautionary measures and as such they cannot be cured but can be managed by diet, rasayana etc. or can be successively eliminated by applying rasayana measures . and other therapeutics mentioned under the management of natural disorders. STH Sta Ta sere: | S.Su 24/7 (Dalhana) Akélaja vyaédhi’s appear at improper time and occur due to lack of effort in precautionary measures. These diseases can be magaged based on dosic treatment and treatment to vyddhi itself. Vyadhi 145 Two types of Vyadhi “Tut aared: Wile waka | wenden: derderget | aweqaa wad (Pratyutpanna Karma) aa Thieahe wia meget Hat qaata eritur qeugEyvaikgvas a- ufgerh fafeart wfatierrt AASALS atl A.S.Su 22/1 Activities of the present life may be seen or may not be. It is observed by not following the standard regimen prescribed by our great @c@ryas or indulging into the activities which are contrary to prescribed regimen. adeetst (Pirva Karmaja) seared 7 Ta | we OF carer ut framfrad sea WR | A.S.Su 22/1 Activities of the past lives, earlier it was named as daiva and it is of two kinds i.e. niyata (definite) and aniyata (indefinite). SUAAH (Ubhayatmaka) Wg Goede: wean: faatien tava: seater HeTeattyal vance: l A.S.Su 22/1 It may be assumed that all seen activities are those of present life and opposite are unseen and having divine origin. Causes are mild but produce dreadful diseases, it may be ob- served in seen or unseen mixed features. CUA (Parabhisamskaraja) Parabhisamskaraja means concieved or developed by oth- ers. They argue that if all the effects are accepted due to ones own activities, then there will be no harm from enemies. That’s why person do many acts to please another person and will try to get benefit and happiness from him or will get displeasure, misery, punishments from his improper activities. A.S.Su 22/06
146 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana arate 24 fen (Dosa Bhedena Tridha) won Fart ate: andsit afatsar 1 FEANs cas Raa Aaah: | A.Hr.Su 12/58 Dosaja vyadhi’s are those manifests duc to particular causes for the aggravation of dosa leading to development of vikara’s by disturbed dosa. Karmaja vy@dhi’s are those occurs due to without any ap- parent cause. Dosa karmaja vyadhi’s are those evolves out of less causative factors but produces terrific diseases. Classification of Diseases Based on Prognosis arateataunne arg fata: | S.Su 10/7 Physician must identify the disease as curable and incur- able and accordingly plan the treatment therapeutics to get suc- cess. qeret wi we egepeeaneni: a) famed, 3 mera frat feet) Csu 10/9-10 Curable diseases are subdivided into sukhasadhya (cur- able without difficulty) and krechra sadhya (curable with diffi- culty). Incurable diseases are subdivided into two types i.e. yapya (manageable) and anupakrama (not manageable). Again curable diseases is subdivided into three types i.e. mild thera- peutics,’moderate therapeutics and excellent therapeutics. This may not be possible for incurable diseases. TAME, eT agate yiter, neqdd Pye, steady asTar- fate | ~ S.Su 21/37 (Dathana) In severe morbid condition sodhana therapy is neccessary to eliminate excess dosds. Langhana and pdacana is sufficient to cure moderate degree of morbidity. Palliative therapy is enough for mild degree of morbidity. Vyadhi 147 WANA (Sukha Sadhya) aN 13. 14. COmMANAYN aaa: yeni wager ar a ao Get get 7 ae: wefasiag TA Bee 7 set Vans: | nite waa a wWielusl + ai aapas: ager te: divs a) agaraaufrya = ae aU | . C.Su 10/11-13 Points indicating good prognosis are as follows— . Etiology, prodromal symptoms, symptomatology all are mild. 4 ; . Qualities of the involved dhatu are not homologous with dosa. . ; ; 7 ; There won’t be any similarity in-the involved dosas with prakrti. ; There may not be any suitable environment for the devel- opment of the disease in respect to season and qualities. . Land may not be conducive for the aggravation of dosas. . Only one path is involved. . Early onset with less duration. . Free from complications. Only one dosa is involved in the pathogenesis. Body is strong both physically and mentally to overcome the adverse effects of therapeutics and all strong, moder- ' ate and mild medicaments may be employed as per dis- ease. All the four fold therapeutic measures are easily available. Youth, male and one who has control over sense organs. A.S.Su 2/26 Vital organs are spared. Hae: WCET: YSN we: | (S.Su. 35/46) Whose agni functions are normal.
148 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana 15, Wert WIA! (S.Su. 10/6) Treat treatable diseases 16. If it is contrary to place, constitution, suitablity and sea- son. S.Su 35/45 HPAL (Krcechrasadhya) Rife qdeorot waren weet ae | apret enh Gearon ars - eres a Teh Gear Tepes | yaaa weg Serer ferendarasi Tei angel ager 1 fast arfrentet ot raparesd feelers | C.Su 10/14-16 The following points favour the diseases which cures with dificulty. 1. Causative factors, premonitory symptoms, symptomatology all are moderate in strength. 2. Qualities of either kala, prakrti & dhatus are similar to dosa. 3. If disease manifest to pregnant women, old age person and childrens. ‘4. Moderate complications arises. 5. Disease should be managed by surgery, alkali application and cauterization. - Diseases having moderate’ duration. . Vital organs like heart, brain, joints are involved. - Persons suffering from diseases in such lands, where their aggravation is mentioned. For example— If patient suffering from. varavyadhi in jangaladesa, which predominates vata, is very difficult to cure. 9. Diseases involving only one path but not fully supported by four limbs of: treatment. 10. There may be an involvement of two systems but not hav- ing longer duration. 11. Involvement of two dosds. 12. Treatment may be continued for many days (A.S.Su 2/20) 13. Has many incurable symptoms (A.S.Su 2/20) onan Vyadhi 149 ama [Yapya (Manageable-Diseases)] The diseases which are said to be manageable and the fol- lowing points suggest in favour of yapyara. S. 10/6 CL ATT | S.Su 10, Manage the manageable diseases. Praag ATTA TTT | TAMCT TACT VGTS S- qpradaq | edt agendest wi aPereonfany 1 Prengentt thi dtfanrerrafeereny | farenfadtasry C.Su 10/17-18 The following points indicates the yapya nature of disease. 1. Disease persist for the remaining period of life. ; 2. Person is managing the life by taking proper therapeutics along with wholesome regimen and enjoying little comfort and happiness for the relief to his ailments. 3. Symptoms may aggravate if person adopts unwholesome dietetics and behaviour or by consumption of etiological! factors. - . Deeper dhdtus are involved i,;e dhatugatajvara, dhatugata kustha etc. . Vital organs like marma and sandhi affected. ; . Disease persist continously for longer period of time. . Diseases manifest by involving two dosas. . Does not get cured without leaving remnants. A.S.Su 2/2] . Diseases manifest due to bad actions of patient. A.S.Su 2/21 . Patient is surviving due to his due span of life. A.S.Su 2/2] . Patient dies, if medication is stopped. S.Su 23/10-10 Wearsva [Pratyakhyeya (Absolute incurability) or AIHA (Anupakrama)] rN HK DOWrIran | 1 ai C.Su 10/19-20 The following points suggest the absolute incurability of the disease are as follows—
150 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijfiana AHl the three dosas are involved. 1. 2. Diseases not responding to all therapeutic measures. 3. Spreaded to all directions. 4. Diseases causes excitement, restlessness and patient may become unconscious. 5. All the sense organs afflicted badly. 6. Patient becomes weak and emaciated and disease advances to deeper dhatus involving all the dhdtus. 7. Patient develops some omnious symptomatology indicat- ing death of the patient. 8. Patient develops giddiness, delusion and restlessness A.S.Su 2/22 9. Sitarniaaiee fear, srt ashtq | S.Su. 10/6 Don’t treat the patient which have persisted for more than one year. 10. This stage destroys the potencies of drugs because of firm- ness, severity and infiltrating dhdtus as evil seizer coun- teracts the manthras. S.Su 23/15-16 Li. waited grey ergara: WA: 1 S.Su. 23/15-16 Gradually affects deeper dhatus & become incurable. Sometimes curable diseases also become incurable or dif- ficult to cure in following persons are as follows— S.Su. 10/8 . aR Priests or students . FF King . @- Women . Wa- Children - FS Aged sie Frightful (timid) w;weaE— Servants of the king aida— Gambler gat Debiliated aafeery— Quacks SYS PNAWAYD = ro Vyadhi 151 11, eifetts- Hiding the disease 12. @%s- Poor 13. HAT Miser 14. sa Anger 15. AMlMaraadi— Those not disciplined in their senses and mind 16, SAa- Destitute (orphans) aeaaed EE (7 Varieties of Diseases) . aaaen: Ge Te Taka | Tennis Wes TAMAS | ag ye ‘aren: \ A.S.Su 22/01 Diseases are of seven varieties namely 1. Sahaja 2. Garbhaja 3. Jataja 4. Pidaja 5. Kalaja 6. Prabhavale 7. Svabhavaja, each one is subdivided into two, so totally 1 types. 7 - 1. Sahaja— Same as described under Gdibala pravrtta vyadhi. 2. Garbhaja- Same as described under janmabala pravrtia vyadhi. . 3, Jataja— WAM: ATT VHT STITT | AS Su 22/1 It is caused by one’s own conduct. It is divided into two kinds santarpanaja and apatarpanaja. aay : \ *Piaare A.S.Su. 22/1 These diseases manifest due to injury by weapons like wounds, fractures, blows, anger, grief, fear etc. classified as Sarira and manasa. _ - 5, Kalaja— Same as described under kalabala pravritta vyadhi. 6. Prabhavaja— Same as like that of daiva bala pravrtta vyadhi. _ 7. Svabhavaja— Same as like that of svabhava bala pravrtta vyadhi.
152 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijiana erature faart (Santarpanottha Vikara) watate aarurarekt | Adoptation of food and activities which supports the oversaturation. wrrdei fe fafee; fered Gaui a aardor fifa: WHC Ferrer erathoy Patras TT SUSMTA | C.Su 23/3-7 (Gangadhara) Santarpana is classified into two i.e. snigdha and ruksa. Snigdha santarpana vikara’s are those manifest due to exces- sive santarpana of dhatus is called santarpanotha vikaras. fer (Etiological factors) Tenet a: fara nytifefifesd: (Cakrapani) cr waar: V1 C.Su 23/3-5 Aharaja Karana Excess consumption of unctous, sweet, heavy slimy sub- stances, new cereals, fresh wine, meat of marshy and aquatic animals, milk and its products, jaggery and its preparations, flour preparations. Viharaja K@rana Along with consumption of Zhdraja karana, if person in- dulges following activities leads to manifestation of Santarpana vikara, e Lack of physical activities e Day sleep ¢ Sleeps and sits in comfortable beds for longer duration Vyadhi’s The following diseases’ are going to manifest are as fol- lows— Vyadhi 153 © Prameha,. pidaka, kotha, kandi, pandvamaya, jvara, kustha Amapradosaja vyadhi (visicika & alasaka). Mutrakrcchra ‘Arocaka Tandra Alasya Guru gatrata Indriya srotasam lepa (Coating and obstruction in sense organs) Buddhi moha (manomoha) Pramilaka (satam pradhyanam) Sopha PratiSyaya etc. C.Su 23/4-7 (Cakrapani and Gangadhara) Midhavata, arésa, kamal, pliha, hrdroga, rajayaksma, kasa, §vasa, galagraha, krmi,. grahani dosa, §vitram. C.Su 13/22-24 arrarctuiteet ferenty (A patarpanottha Vikara) auton ereninurerta cyaite Gar dato | C.Su 23/27-28 (Gangadhara) Apatarpana vikara's manifest due to the adaptation of fac- tors which are opposite to snigdha santarpana like fasting, less intake of food, consumption of dry foods etc. frera (Etiological factors) e Excess intake of pungent, astringent, bitter, rough, light, dried vegetables & meat etc. e Excessive exercise, fighting with strong person, sup- pression of natural urges, excessive travelling, fast running etc. Vikara’s aera get auitst: Yen are oftera: vat: | HANIA Uva yeTA Ta: | 12Vik. & Roga
154 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiana fauys. dime: yt wgteiree deer watfrarateya 2 art aris wan: | same: wd wet asuedoma C.Su 23/27-29 e Deha ksaya © Agnimardavata e Balaksaya @ Varnahani e Oja ksaya e Sukra ksaya e@ Mamsa ksaya e@ Jvara e Kasa © Parsvasiila e Arocaka ® Srotra daurbalya e Unmdda e@ Pralapa e Ardaya vyatha © Vit sangha e Mitra sangha e Sila © Jangha Sila e Parvasthi bheda e Sandhi bheda e Vata vyadhi e Urdhvavata vikdra like §vasa etc. ware Uttan (Vyadhi Pariksa - Examination of diseases) enfafastarg smfafen: ad waa Glaen:, aren, aren:, wearstarya | aatary yafeen ata —frrairatiie:, mecha, sraetannt ste 1 S.Su 35/18 Vyadhi is classified into three kinds based on prognosis namely sddhya, yapya and pratyakhydya. It can be examined’ by three factors i.e. Aupasargika, prakkevala, anyalaksana. . sttraffe tht (Aupasargika Roga) wa, dhoafia ara a: yates eat serrated anirergsit, a, Wye Watomaay: 3 S.Su 35/18 © it manifests after the manifestation of main disease e It’s main root i.e. component or pathogenetic factors are one and the same with that of main disease, Vyadhi 155 e Itis also called upadrava. Wrersact att ara Ma (Prakkevala and Anyalaksana) Tehaei AM a: Wilaheal caer weds qurava; saetarcit am at ufasre snfareame, a gear Ua: |S. Su 35/18 Prakkevala vyadhi's are those manifest from the very be- - ginning without premonitory symptoms and complications. Anyalaksana vyadhi’s are those manifest before the mani- festation of actual disease and it is also known as pirvarupa. Te wy eMled (Guru Laghu Vyadhita) Be UY St Get anita wat waa: — Teena, casera | Wa TS Sad Van: Tease Aughraneegentad saqvad, AQenedisut: WearsMeMas Reet ga Tat | TATE MEM: faci aged qwals sae anne orga femfaaert t). C.Vi ‘7/3 Two varieties of persons are seen as diseased. One variety of person, who is: suffering from a severe disease appears to be - suffering from a mild disease because of the superior quality of manas, bala and Sarira. Other variety of person, who is suffering from a mild dis- order appear to be suffering from a severe disorder because of inferior manas, bala and Sarira. : The physician who is not aware of this, fails to'decide mild- ness or severity of the disease, only on Bross observation of patient. So, complete knowledge is essential to understand the con-_ cept clearly. If one who fails to diagnose diséase accurately, he also fails in prescribing rational remedy. When they prescribe mild therapeutics for severely diseased individual, it will not cure the disease but on the contrary it aggravates the disease condition. When they take mild disease as severe one and. prescribes
156 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfidna stronger therapeutics, which eliminates dosas along with it manifests certain adverse reactions to the body. Thus those who regard the part of the means of knowledge as sufficient to pro- vide knowledge of the entire objects, fall in their own pursuit. On the contrary, who prescribes the therapy after acquiring entire knowledge of the subject will gain desired success. Pada UAT TT: (Svatantra Paratantra Roga) Tea TT: SMA TaTAARaNT Al HMI ANT: | TA: TAM: VABTHAA AIMS AYMAN | Sat ef agate: age ater sft 1 daraaitann are fee: 1 qtenficisgmftrrge ASM: YASAAM: SAKATA AIA ATAAS ATA GTATAT | TERE a wert safe targqayTed at apa | cata a aeertyose wens fetter 1 a fe dtsreacadt safe | canis uftfecscerard wie frsanfeeq 1 aqemssa: wert wa Thits=aet wares 2g: wala 1 ae vad cfr waft at carer 1 dt Vases | eM: | aerifes yeMarritarseuiay ofivara: careasacet: | at arrer | ata: Biheea | Wengersmemt Rieter crft:| agai a ae aga: dacth fer waa WSS og UR: TA A Casa we | Te alee: WRT: waa | A.S.Su 22/10 These diseases manifest either as the chief one or as reti- nue (associate, accompanying) of another disease; known re- spectively as anubandhya (leader, primary, chief) and anubandha (follower, secondary, associate, retinue) the former is independent & has specific, well defined features (symptoms & signs) cause & diagnosis. The latter is its opposite. Similarly also the dosa are of two kinds, anubandhya & anubandha. Diseases which are secondary is of two kinds; purogami (manifesting first) & anugami (manifesting later). The former is known as purvarupa & latter is known as upadrava. These will have to be recognised in particular contexts. They gener- Vyadhi 157 ally subside with the cure of the primary diseases but when they do not subside they should be treated after treating the powerful one. They should be attended immediately without opposing the primary disease because such complication cause severe troubles to the body which has become weak already by the disease, as seen in the case of diabetic carbuncles. Further one primary disease may become the primary cause for another disease. For example, fever causes bleeding disor- ders or vice versa; both together may cause dyspnoea; spleenic disorders cause abdominal enlargement; which in turn cause dropsy; hemorrhoids may cause tumor and enlargement of ab- domen, diarrhoea and duodenal disease; nasal catarrh may cause cough and fevers, these two become the cause for consumption for emaciation etc. An improper act may produce single disease or group of diseases; in the same way appearance of one symptom denotes any one particular disease and also for many diseases; treat- ment of one disease may mitigate one but at the same time it may aggravate the other diseases. Therefore physician has to examine the diseased person carefully by using appropriate diagnostic aids to get maximum results. Two types of Vyadhi aa far: AAR: AAETH Te | C.Su 20/10 Vyadhi is classified into two kinds saémdanyaja vyadhi and nanatmaja vyadhi. arent fant (Saminyaja Vikaira) Tras st anata: wets fafa St aes | C.Su 20/10 (Cakrapani) wa Umrasn sf aaraa aseafera woot wed arear ftratel aataral Bearer Tfsrarareis =eAal B A MAAS: | C.Su 20/10 (Gangadhara)
158 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Samdnyaja vikadra’s are those which manifest either by vata, pitta, kapha, or in combination of two dosa or in conglo- meration of three dosa leading to manifestation of various dis- orders. Examples One type of disease C.Su 19/8 Wei Say seTaealaes:, wea: ware sf Helena Fa: WRT: Usat were sha sree: 1 C.Su 19/8 1. Urusthambha caused due to Gma and tridosa. 2. Sanya@sa manifest due to tridosa’s involving both body & mind. 3. Atatvabhinivesa, which is mahagada. This disease is considered as incurable. Diseases having 2 sub types C.Su 19/7 1. a senate sonfiara: yiteqerra vitnfirageten- Wye: | Two kinds of Jvara i.e. i) Sita samuttha—manifest due to cold and patient finds comfort in hot substances. it) Usna samuttha—manifest due to heat substances and gets relieved by cold substances. 2. 8 aoTatd Parry | Two varieties of Vrana i.e. i) Nija (Endogenous) and ii) Agantuja (Exogenous). 3. Maranatha TAPAS | Two kinds of Ayama (Body) i.e. i) Baéhya (Back ward) ii) Abhyantara (Forward). 4. 3 Terentate arargranres | Two kinds of Grdhrasi (Sciatica) ive. i) Vataja grdhrasi and ii) Vata kaphaja grdhrasi. Vyadhi 159 5. 2 HMA sft VSAM PRAIA F | Two types of Kamala i.e. i) Kosthasraya kamala (Hepato cellular) and ii) Sakha@sraya kamala (Obstructive jaundice). 6. tafaerarafafat srererant fereferent tt Two kinds of Ama i.e. i) Alasaka (Intestinal torper) and ii) Vistucika (Choleric diarrhoea). 7, fgfaet ararenfata eee = 1 Two kinds of vatarakta i.e. i) Gambhira vatarakta- (Deep seated) and ii) Utthana Vatarakta (Superficial structures are in- volved). 8. fafaerarerifinta qenroaraifor a | _ Two kinds of arsdas i.e. i) Suska (dry, non bleeding) and i) Ardra (wet, bleeding). Diseases having 3 subtypes C.Su 19/6 L. wa: wien gta araftragetearret: | Sotha is classified into 3 kinds i) Vataja, ii) Pittaja and iii) Kaphaja 2. aitfor freebie Ta argc \ Kilasa is of 3 types i.e. i) Rakta kildsa (Red coloured), ii) Tamra kilasa (Copper coloured) and iii) Sukla kilasa (White coloured). 3. frieet cifraftatata sedan AAAAaart a | Raktapitra (Bleeding disorder) is subclassified 3 kinds i.e. i) Urdhvaga raktapitta (Bleeding from upper channels), ii) Adhobhaga raktapitta (Bleeding from lower, channels) and iii). Ubhaya raktapitta (Bleeding from both upper and lower chan- nels). Diseases having 4 sub types C.Su 19/5 1. Bras wet sta ataftrence Gaara Fra: | Apasmara is classified into 4 kinds i) Vataja apasmara, ii)
160 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijfiana Pittaja apasmara, iii) Kaphaja apasmara and iv) Sannipataja apasmara. . 2. Tanisfartngacanr: | Eye diseases are 4 types. i) Vataja aksi roga, ii) Pittaja aksi roga, iii) Kaphaja aksi roga and iv) Sannipataja aksi roga. 3. Hafan | Karna (Ear) diseases are of 4 kinds. i) Vataja karna roga, ii) Pittaja karna roga, iii) Kaphaja karna roga and iv) Sannipataja karna roga. 4, oftgarrgarant | Pratisydya (discharge from nose) is of 4 kinds Le. i) Vataja Pratisyaya, ii) Pittaja pratisyaya, iii) Kaphaja pratisyaya and iv) Sannipataja pratisyaya. : ; 5. FER aea4nt | _ Mukha roga (diseases of oral cavity) is of 4 kinds i.e. i) Vataja mukha roga, ii) Pittaja mukha roga, iii) Kaphaja mukha roga and iv) Sannipaitaja mukha roga. 6. TEU Aegean | Grahani dosa classified into 4 kinds. i) Vataja grahani dosa, ii) Pittaja grahani dosa iii) Kaphaja grahani dosa and iv) Sannipataja grahani dosa. 7. TERA | Mada (intoxication) is of 4 kinds. i) Vataja mada, ii) Pittaja mada, iii) Kaphaja mada and iv) Sannipataja mada. 8. Testvarant | Mircha is of 4 kinds i.e. i) Vataja murcha, ii) Pittaja mircha, iii) Kaphaja marcha and iv) Sannipataja mircha. 9, wa: sitet sft Tee wear aa fae | 4 types of Sosa (dhatu depletion disorder) i.e. i) Sahasajanya Sosa, ii) Sandhdranajanya §osa, iii) Ksayajanya Sosa and iv) VisamaSanajanya §osa, Vyadhi 161 10. AUT FTAA TAA AT ARIST: YATE | Klaibya (impotency) is of 4 kinds. i) Bijopaghataja klaibya, ii) Dvaja bhangaja klaibya, iii) Jaraja klaibya and iv) Sukraksayaja klaibya. Diseases having 5 sub types C.Su 19/4 1. Teen sft araftra awe afaragnfirasm: | Gulma is classified into 5 kinds. i) Vataja gulma, ii) Pittaja gulma, iii) Kaphaja gulma, iv) Sannipataja gulma and v) Sonitaja gulma. 2. teefte are i i) Vataja pliha dosa, ii) Pittaja pliha dosa, iii) Kaphaja pltha dosa, iv) Sannipataja pliha dosa and v) Sonitaja pliha dosa. 3. Wa caren fa araftrrenmercerasmt: | - Kasa is of 5 types. i) Va@taja kasa, ii) Pittaja kdsa, iii) Kaphaja kasa, iv) Ksataja kasa and v) Ksayaja kasa. 4, TErarn gia vations: | Svasa is of 5 types i.e. i) Maha Svasa, ii) Urdhva Svasa, iii) Chinna §vasa, iv) Tamaka §vasa and v) Ksudra Svasa. 5, us fearan sft net weit enta agisact a | Hikka is of five types. i) Mahati hikkd, ii) Gambhira hikka, iii) Vyapeta hikka, iv) Ksudra hikké and v) Annaja hikka. 6. TT BeUTT her arerfererrerareTereT Thea: t Trsna is of five types. i) Vataja trsnd, ii) Pittaja trsnd, iii) Amaja trsna, iv) Ksayaja trsna and v) Upasamsargatmika trsna. 7, ta ode sia fasreietibin aratirians afrordisenearee | Chardi is of five types. i) Dvistartha samyogaja chardi, ii) Vataja samyogaja chardi, iii) Pittaja Samyogaja chardi, iv) Kaphaja samyogaja chardi and v) SannipGtaja samyogaja chardi.
162 Ayurvediya Vikiti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 3. EPR arated aeeraaarasan: | Bhaktasydnasana is of five kinds. i) VGtaja bhakta- Syanasana, ii) Pittaja bhaktasyanasana, iii) Kaphaja bhakta- Syanasana, iv) Sannipataja bhaktasyanaSana and v) Dvesa bhaktaS$ ya€naSana. 9, aS RRR sft Geleerafrecrea arate ae afer fefasn: 1 Siroroga is of five kinds. i) Vataja Siro roga, ii) Pittaja Siro roga, iii) Kaphaja Siro roga, iv) Sannipdtaja Siro roga and v) Krinija Siro roga. 10. FS Bam sfa Prhiearkean | Hrdroga is of five kinds. (i) Vataja hrdroga, ii) Pittaja hrdroga, iii) Kaphaja hrdroga, iv) Sannipadtaja hrdroga and v) Krmija hrdroga. 11. 3a Ungthn fa ara fra aan afrageo: 1 Panduroga is of five types. i) Vataja pandu roga, ii) Pittaja paidu roga, iii) Kaphaja pandu roga, iv) Sannipdtaja pandu roga and v) Mrdbhaksanaja pandu roga., 12. watane gfe artis afraramry ffir: \ Unmdda is of five types. i) Vataja unmada, ii) Pittaja unmada, iii) Kaphaja unmada, iv) Sannipataja unmada and v} Agantuja unmada. : Diseases having 6 sub types C.Su 19/3 1. Usdtern sta arated ser vitesse: | Alisdra is classified into 6 types. i) Vataja atisara, ii) Pittaja atisara, iii) Kaphaja atisara, iv) Sannipataja atisara, atisara and vi) Sokaja atisara. 2. Wyatt sft araarttagercants FAIA: | Udavarta is of 6 types. i) Vataja udavarta, ii) Mutraja udavarta, iii) Purisaja udavarta, iv) Sukraja uddvarta, v) Chardija udadvarta and Vi) Ksavathuja udavarta. v) Bhayaja Vyadhi 163 Diseases having 7 sub types C.Su 19/2 L wa pe soeigacvscrairequette foes epreeuntfy | Kustha is of 7 types. i) Kapdala kustha, ii) Udumbara kustha, . iii) Mandala kustha, iv) Rsyajihva kustha, v) Pundarika kustha, vi) Sidhma kustha and vi) Kakanaka kustha. 2. ea fasent sfa writen aresiient safer advert feta faset ai ; Seven varieties of Pidaka’s are i) Saravika, ii) Kacchapika, iii) Jalini, iv) Sarsapi, v) Alaji, vi) Vinata and vii) Vidradhi. aferafrararea: | 3. ea feet gia crafts nit reandias 7 kinds of Visarpa i.e. i) Vataja visarpa, ii) Pittaja visarpa, iii) Kaphaja visarpa, iv) Agni visarpa, v) Kardamaka visarpa, vi) Granthi visarpa and vii) Sannipataja visarpa. Diseases having 8 sub types C.Su 19/1 1. BBTqaUnfa araitrrennafaanncierakeraeterier | 8 kinds of udara roga. i) Vataja udara, ii) Pittaja udara, iii) Kaphaja udara, iv) Sannipataja udara, v) Plihaja udara, vi) Baddha udara, vii) Cchidrodara and viii) Dakodara. 2. set Fara sia arditea afraeattyrea we wiforast: | Mutraghata is of eight types. i) Vataja mutraghata, ii) Pittaja mutraghata, iii) Kaphaja miutraghata, iv) Sannipataja miutraghata, v) ASmarija mitra ghata, vi) Sarkardja miutraghata, vii) Sukraja mutraghata and viii) Sonitaja mutraghata. 3. aot aftdta sft aacd dhied acai thecd Garage dad tivaniaciesa | 8 kinds of Ksira dosds. i) Vaivarnya, ii) Vairasyam, iii)
164 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana Daurgandhya, iv) Paicchilyam, v) Phena sanghata, vi) Ruksa, vii) Gaurava and viii) Atisneha. 4, a8} Teeter sia aq YS thPrenead yee afefifserrs snqufeanaente a | 8 kinds of Reto dosas (Seminal vitiation) are i.e. i) Tanu, ii) Suskam, iii) Phenila, iv) Asveta, v) Piiti, vi) Atipicchila, vii) Anyadhatupahita and viii) Avasadi. Diseases having 20 sub types C.Su 19/9 1. fata: aiionae sft gen frites then afesiern: 1 Sooner eiterer eierstar: area shige SeMMATTP AT we VATA: | WAT FTA TeTIEGa eHyen: whee wEerate AaRT:, sear iva eee @ yen: diquersafa wr qa: 1 20 types of krmi roga described Bahirmalaja krmi 02 i) Yuka, ii) Pipilika Sonitaja krmi 06 iii) KeSada, iv) Lomada, v) Lomadvipa, vi) Saurasd, vii) Audumbara, viii) Jantumatara Kaphaja krmi 07 ix) Antrdda, x) Udaravesta, xi) Hrdayada, xii) Curu, xiii) Darbhapuspa, xiv) Saugandhika, xv) Mahdaguda Purisaja krmi 08 xvi) Kakeruka, xvii) Makeruka, xviii) Leliha, xix) Silaka and xx) Sausurada 1. fava: win ryEMtedgaiive THteva arterT UREA Ta YacErd Yea vikteva witleva eater mrentesit ag yearn, andes aretes, Aerteva Siege for ee ext Rrra era: 1 aa Vyadhi 165 aera aeartners efit teva meterate scary ararsfer Cc. Su. 19/9 20 types of Prameha Kaphaja Prameha 10 - i) Udaka meha, ii) Iksubalikarasa meha iti) Sandra meha, iv) Sandra prasada meha, v) Sukla meha, vi) Sukra meha, vii) Sita meha, viii) Sanair meha, ix) Sikatameha x) Lala meha Pittaja Prameha 06 xi) Ksara meha, xii) Kala meha, xiii) Nila meha, xiv) Lohita meha, xv) Manjista meha, xvi) Haridra meha Vataja Prameha 04 xvii) Vasa meha, xviii) Majja@ meha, xix) Hasti meha and xx) Madhu meha. 20 types of Yoni Vyapat C. Su. 19/9 1. Vataja Yoni Vyapat . Pittaja Yoni Vyapat . Kaphaja Yoni Vyapat . Sannipataja Yoni Vyapat 2 3 4 5. Raktayoni 6. Arajaska 7. Acarana 8. Ati carana 9. Prak carana 10. Upapluta 11. Paripluta 12. Udavartini 13. Karnini 14, Putraghni 15. Antarmukhi
166 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijnana & Roga Vijiana 16. Sicimukhi 17. Suska 18. Vamini 19. Sandayoni 20. Mahayoni Diseases having 2 sub types. CC 3/32-33 1. Jvara— I (A) Sarira (B) Manasa 0 (A) Saumya (B) Agneya Til (A) Antarvega (B) Bahirvega IV (A) Prakrta (B) Vaikrta Vv (A) Sadhya (B) Asadhya Diseases having 5 sub types. C.Ci 3/34 1. Jvara— (A) Santata (B) Satata (C) Anyadhyuska (D) Trtiyaka (E) Caturthaka 2. Arocaka— (A) Vataja arocaka S.Utt 57/3 (B) Pittaja arocaka (C) Kaphaja arocaka (D) Sannipataja arocaka (BE) Bhaktopaghata arocaka (A) Vataja upadaméa (M.Ni 47/5) ; (B) Pittaja upadamsa (C) Kaphaja upadaméa (D) Raktaja upadamsa (E) Sannipataja upadamsa 3. Upadamsa— Vyadhi 167 Diseases having 9 sub types. 1. Sotha— M.Ni 36/2-3 (A) Vataja fotha (B) Pittaja Sotha (C) Kaphaja Sotha (D) Vata-pittaja sotha (E) Vata-kaphaja Sotha (F) Kapha-pittaja sotha (G) Abhighataja sotha (H) Visaja §otha Diseases having 7 sub types. 1. Vrddhi- (M.Ni 37) » (A) Vataja vrddhi (B) Pittaja vrddhi (C) Kaphaja vrddhi (D) Raktaja vrddhi -(E) Medaja vrddhi Diseases having 6 types. 1. Murcha-— (S.Utt 46/7-8) 2. Svarabheda— (S.Utt 53/3) 3. Arga— (M.Ni 5/1) (F) Mitraja vrddhi (G) Antraja vrddhi (A) Vataja murcha (B) Pittaja murcha (C) Kaphaja murcha (D) Sonitaja miurcha (E) Madhyaja murcha (F) Visaja murcha (A) Vataja svarabheda (B) Pittaja svarabheda (C) Kaphaja svarabheda (D) Sannipataja svarabheda (E) Ksayaja svarabheda (F) Medaja svarabheda (A) Vataja arsa (B) Pittaja arsa (C) Kaphaja arsa (D) Sannipataja arsa (E) Raktaja arsa
168 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana (F) Sahaja arsa Diseases having 7 sub types. 1. Jvara— (A) Rasa dhatugata jvara (C.Ci 3/35) (B) Raktadhatugata jvara (C) Mamsa dhatugata jvara (D) Meda dhatugata jyara (E) Asthi dhatugata jvara (F) Majja dhatugata jvara (G) Sukra dhatugata jvara 2. Raktapitta— (A) Kaphaja raktapitta (C.Ci 4/11-12) (B) Vataja raktapitta (C) Pittaja raktapitta (D) Vata-pittaja raktapitta (E) Vata-kaphaja raktapitta (F) Kapha-pittaja raktapitta (G) Sannipatika raktapitta 3. Trsna— (A) Vataja trsna (B) Pittaja trsna (C) Kaphaja trsna (D) Ksataja trsna (E) Ksayaja trsna (F) Amaja trsna (G) Annaja trsna Diseases having 8 sub types. 1. Jvara— (A) Vataja Jvara (C.Ci 3/35) (B) Pittaja Jvara (C) Kaphaja Jvara (D) Sannipataja Jvara (E) Vata-pittaja Jvara (F) Vata-kaphaja Jvara (G) Kapha-pittaja Jvara (H) Agantujaja Jvara 2. Sosa— . (A) Vyavaya Sosi (S.Utt 41/16) (B) Soka gosi (C) Jara Sosi 3. Sila— (M.Ni 26/1) Vyadhi 169 (D) AdhvaSosi So0si (E) Vyayama. gosi (F) Vrna gosi (G) Uraksata §osi (H) Upavasatah gosi (A) Vataja sila (B) Pittaja Sila (C) Kaphaja sila (D) Sannipataja gula (E) Vata-pittaja Sula (F) Vata kaphaja Sula (G) Kapha-pittaja Sila (HK) Amaja sila Diseases having 11 sub types. 1. Kustha— (C.Ci 7/21-26) Diseases having 12 types. 1. Mutraghata— (S.Utt 58/3-4) 13 Vik. & Roga (A) Ekakustha (B) Carmakhya (C) Kitibha (D) Vipadika (E) Alasaka (F) Dadru (G) Carmadala (H) Pama (1) Visphota (J) Sataru (K) Vicarcika (A) Vata kundalika (B) Asthila (C) Vata basti (D) Mutrasthila (E) Mitrajathara (F) Mitrotsanga (G) Mutraksaya (H) Mitragranthi (I) Mutragukra
170 Ayorvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Classification of Diseases According to Sarangadhara (7th chapter Pirvakhanda) Diseases having 1 type. 1. Kamala ; 3. Kumbhakamala 5. Halimaka 7. Urograha 9. Soma roga 11. Medo roga 13. Andavrddhi 15. Gandamdla 17. Gandalaji 19. Udarda 21. Sitapitta (J) Usnavata (K) Mutrasada-kaphaja (L) Mitrasdda-pittaja 2. Paramada 4. Pandjirna 6. Panavibhrama 8. Pandtyaya 10. Bhrama 12. Nidra 14. Tandra 16. Sanyadsa 18. Glani 20. Annadcava Sula 22. Pittajvarajanya Sila Diseases having 2 sub types 1. Ana&ha— 2. Kosthabheda— 3. Ar$Sa— Diseases having 3 types. 1. Ajirna— 2. Alasaka— 3. Visicika— (A) Pakvasayodbhava (B). AmasSayodbhava (A) Chinnantra (B) Misrtantraka (A) Sahaja (B) Uttara janmaja (A) Suska (B) Ardra (A) Vistabdhajirna (Vata) (B) Vidagdhajirna (Pitta) (C) Amdajirna (Kapha) (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (A) Vataja 4. Carmakila— 5. Raktapitta— 6. Amlapitta— Vyadhi 171 (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (A) Urdhvaga (B) Adhoga (C) Ubhaya (A) Vataja (B) Kaphaja (C) Kapha vataja Diseases having 4 sub types. 1. Pravahika— 2. Agni vikara— 3. Murcha— 4. Apasmara— 5. Amavata— 6. ASmari- (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Raktapravahika (A) Visamagni (Vata) (B) Tiksnagni (Pitta) (C) Mandagni (Kapha) (D) Bhasmakagni (Vata-pitta) (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipdataja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja™ (D) Sannipataja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sukrasmari
172 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Diseases having 5 sub types. 1. Pandu- 2. Kasa— 3. Ksaya— 4. Arocaka— 5. Grahani dosa— 6. Upadamsa— 7. Pumstva dosa- (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Mrttika bhaksanajanya (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Uraksataja (E) Dhatuksayaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Uraksataja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Manastapaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Amaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Raktaja (A) Irsyaka (B) Asekya (C) Kumbhika (D) Sugandhi (E) Sanda Vyadhi Diseases having 6 sub types. 1. Arsa— 2. Sosa- 3. Svarabheda— 4. Trsna— 5. Unmada-— 6. Vidradhi- (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Raktaja (E) Sannipataja (F) Samsargaja (A) Ati stri prasangaja (B) Sokaja (C) Vranaja (D) Adhva-sramaja (E) Ati vyayamaja (F) Jarajanyaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Medoja (E) Sannipataja (F) Ksayaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja -(E) Upasargaja _(F) Ksayaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Visaja (F) Manasika dukhaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Raktaja (F) Ksataja 173
174 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Diseases having 7 sub types. (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Sokatisara (F) Bhayatisara (G) Amatisara (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Krmija (F) Grnajanya (G) Garbhavati strijanya (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Raktaja (F) Madhyaja (G) Visaja (A) Raktapittaja (B) Raktaja (C) Trsnajanya (D) Pittaja (E) Dhatuksayaja ~ (F) Marmaghata (G) Raktapiirna udara Diseases having 8 types. 1. Sala~ 1. Atisara— 2. Chardi~ 3. Meda~ 4. Daha- (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Vata-pittaja (E) Vata-kaphaja i 2. Parinama sula— 3. Gulma roga— 4. Mutrakrcechra— 5. Bhagandara— 6. Vatarakta— Vyadhi 175 — (F) Kapha-pittaja (G) Sannipataja (H) Amasila Like sila (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Vata-pittaja (E) Vata-kaphaja (F) Kapha-pittaja (G) Sannipataja (H) Raktaja (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Sannipataja (E) Sukra krcchra (F) Vit krechra (G) Ghata krcchra (H) Asmari krechra (A) Sataponaka (B) Ustragriva (C) Parisravi (D) Rju _ (B) Pariksepi (F) Arsajanya (G) Unmargi (H) Sankhavarta (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Tridosaja (E) Raktaja (F) Vata-pittaja (G) Vata-kaphaja (H) Kapha-pittaja
176 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Diseases having 9 sub types. 1. Sotha roga— ; (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Vata-pittaja (E) Vata-kaphaja (F) Kapha-pittaja (G) Sannipataja (H) Abhighataja (D Visaja 2. Granthi- (A) Vataja (B) Pittaja (C) Kaphaja (D) Raktaja (BE) Sira vikrtijanya (F) Medoja (G) Vranaja (H) Asthi vikritijanya . () Mamsaja granthi © ATaTarst Tae (Nandtmaja Vikara) ATCT Sit ATTRA TREAT SaTT STITT erraTaT feraTET TET SF ATT: | C.Su 20/10 (Gangadhara) ARTeTaT sf a arnefrataracaa ars C.Su 20/10 (Cakrapani) Nanatmaja diseases are those manifest by involving only one dosa. For example : © Vdtaja nanatmaja vikdra e Pittaja nandtmaja vikara © Kaphaja nanatmaja vikara _ att amen fan (Vataja Nanatmaja Vikara) Diseases manifest by vata dosa alone are called vataja nandatmaja vyadhi, 80 types of vataja nandtmaja vikara’s are Vyadhi 177 described, even though vata nadnatmaja diseases are said to be innumerable. We anfsanryqearareams: | deen Tater, faurear A, Wayet UB, WWM, UE A, AAEM a, TowAeya, faftsartsd a, dad a, srqaeva, arqfaseva,. seeruya, ROA, UTET aS, PANT, TEkiva, qaUTdaya, WaT, agurrera, ifintara, faghara, sladya, wa a, Hort a, arr a, fia vera, geaeva, urafandya, saudeya, aatera, aredaye, afiatava, — wave a, ped G, AAT PA, BATT A, TEMG, BACAR U, ATA, auiget 4, aymeesant u, sect: qhra, afte a, acter, aniagtara, fat a, sfigyet a, afeeqaraya, yeqarera, ywERITA, weTetara, Priva a, Herafieped u, siféd a, THRIPS, Haga, UTP, Sade, sHyA, TPA, gaya, Aaypa, yeu a, feet a, farses, atfereas, tet @, Vee a; VaaSEUNanad a, aeaciva, sraftraferad a, FeairalaeanT AMIS OTA aA SAT: 1 C.Su 20/11 . Nakhabheda (Cracking of nails) . Vipadika (Cracking of soles) Pada sila (Pain in foot) Pada bhramsa (Foot drop) Pada suptata (Numbness in feet) . Vata khuddata (Pain in ankle region) . Gulphagraha (Stiffness in ankle region) . Pindikodvestana (Cramps. in calf muscles) . Grdhrasi (Sciatica) . Janubheda (Tearing pain in knee) . Janu vislesa (Dislocation in knee joint) Be . Urustambha (Stiffness in thigh) . Urusada (Loss of movement in thigh) = SoOMIDAWRWNH eee wn
178 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 14, 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24, 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34, 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 4}. 42. 43. 44, 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. Pangulya (Paraplegia) Guda bhramsa (Prolapse of rectum) Gada@ri (Pain in anus) Vrsana ksepa (Pain in scroatum) Sephastambha (stiffness in penis) Vanksananaha (sprain in groin) Sronibheda (Pain in pelvis girdle) Vid bheda (Diarrhoea) Udavarta (Misperistalsis) Khafjatva (Limping) Kubjatva (Kyphosis) Vamanatva (Dwarfism) Trikgraha (Stiffness in sacral region) Prsthagraha (Stiffness in back) Parsvavamarda (Compression in sides) Udaravesta (Twisting pain in abdomen) Hrnmoha (Cardiac dysfunction) Hrddrava (Tachycardia) Vaksa uddharsa (Rubbing pain in chest) Vaksa uparodha (Constriction in chest) Vaksastoda (Pain in chest) Bahu Sosa (Wasting of arm) Grivadsthambha (Stiffness in neck) Manyastambha (Torticollis) Kantoddhvamsa (Hoarsness of voice) Hanubheda (Pain in jaw) Osthabheda (Pain in lips) Aksibheda (Pain in eyes) Dantabheda (Pain in teeth) Danta Saithilya (Loose teeth) Miukatva (Aphasia) Vaksanga (Stammering speech) Kasdaydasyata (Astringent taste in mouth) Mukhasosa (Dryness in mouth) Arasajnata (Loss of taste sensation) Ghranandéa (Loss of smell sensation) Vyadhi . 179 50. Karnasula (Ear ache) 51. Agabdasravana (Tinitus) 52. Uccaigfruti (Hardness in hearing) 53. Badhirya (Deafness) 54. Vartmastambha (Stiffness in eyelids) 55. Vartma sankoca (Entropion) * 56. Timira (Loss of vision) 57. Aksifula (Pain in eyes) 58. Aksivyudasa (Squint eye) 59. Bhriuvyudasa (Twisting in eye brows) 60. Sankhabheda (Pain in temporal region) 61. Lalata bheda (Pain in frontal region) 62. Siroruk (Haedache) 63. Kesabhiumisphutana (Cracking of scalp) 64. Ardita (Facial paralysis) 65. Ekanga roga (Monoplegia) 66. Sarvanga roga (Paraplegia) 67. Paksavadha (Hemiplegia) 68. Aksepaka (Clonic convulsions) 69. Dandaka (Tonic convulsions) 70. Tama (Feeling of darkness infront of ey¢) 71. Bhrama (Giddiness) 72. Vepathu (Tremor) 73. Jrmbha (Yawning) 74. Hikka (Hiccup) 75. Visada (Asthenia) 16. Atipralapa (Excessive delirium) 77. Rauksya (Roughness) 78. Parusya (Coarsness) 79. Syavarunavabhasata (Black reddish appearance) 80. Asvapna (Insomnia) 81. Anavasthita cittatva (Unstable mind) finest arararst frente (Pittaja Nanatmaja Vikara) fratenriverattonna Bedaqearearean:. weaen— ster,
180 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana seaeea, auntie a, afedara (aera), anprerva, BAA a, wifiaecaya, asa, rarenere (Hie), raTag a, weer a, THalsyE, Taferealerar, Tafint a, Terusenht 4, eftac a, aftaet a, seem a, wane a, warren a, Rearend a, ciferrearern a, Girne a, qonfeert a, ahaa, arate, TeaTEge, ware, YEU, Aguraya, vari a, wa: waeTya, tha aitnpaded a, sf aeaftgrnteratrann: trate hesiaraternea San: | C.Su 20/14 40 Pittaja nanatmaja vyadhi’s are described vrith nomen- clature, even then these are said to be innumerable in number. 1. Osa (Heating) 2. Plosa (Scorching) 3. Daha (Burning) 4. Davathu (Intense heat) 5. Dhumaka (Fuming) 6. Amlaka (Hyper acidity) 7. .Vidaha (Burning sensation in mah@srotas) 8. Antardaha (Internal burning) 9, Amsadaha (Burning sensation in arm) 10. Usmadhikya (pyrexia) 11. Atisveda (Excessive sweating) 12. Angagandha (Foul smell from body) 13. Angavadarana (Tearing of body parts) 14. Sonita kleda (Increased moisture in blood) 15. Mamsa kleda (Increased moisture in muscles) 16. Tvagdaha (Burning sensation in skin) 17. Tvagavadarana (Cracking of skin) 18. Carmadalana (Thickness of skin) 19. Rakta kotha (Urticarial patches) 20. Rakta visphota (Pustules) 21. ‘Raktapitta (Bleeding disorders) 22... Raktamandala (Haemorrhagic rounded patches) 23. Haritatva (Greenishness) Vyadhi 181 24. Hdaridratva (Yellowishness) 25. Nilika (Blue moles) 26. Kaksa (Herpes infections) 27. Kamala (Jaundice) 28. Tiktasyata (Bitter taste in mouth) 29. Lohita gandhasyata (Smell of the blood like that of lohita from oral cavity) 30. Putimukhata (Foetid smell from oral cavity) 31. Trsnadhikya (Increased thirst) 32. Atrpti (Loss of contentment) 33. Asyavipadka (Stomatitis) 34. Galapaka (Inflammation in throat) 35. Aksipaka (Inflammation in eyes) 36. Gudapaka (Inflammation in anus) 37. Medhrapaka (Inflammation in pepis) 38. Jivadana (Discharge of pure blood) 39. Tamahpravesa (Darkness infront of the eye) 40. Harita haridra netra mutra varcastva (Green-yellow discolouration of eyes, urine, stool) worst Arrest frat (Kaphaja Nanatmaja Vikara) vannaearive fasrfana Hel carsarcam:, dae aftarva, wal a, Fateert a, tafe a, Jens a, sere a, Tears UW, Taeara, veshiu, acereafiert a, aeresraiya, aaknsa, weaacdaya, avdaeara, saute, wervsya, sfacitet waFa | C.Su 20/17 1. Trpti (Anorexia nervosa) 2. Tandrad (Drowsiness) 3. Nidradikya (Excess sleep) 4. Staimitya (Excess cold sensation) 5. Gurugatrata (Heaviness in body) 6. Alasya (Lassitude) 7. Mukha madhurya (Sweet taste in mouth)
182 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana: 8. Mukha srava (Salivation) 9. Slesmodgirana (Expectoration of mucous) 10. Malddikya (Excess accumulation of waste products) 11. Baldsaka (Loss of strength) {2. Apakti (Indigestion) : 13. Hrdayopalepa (Adherence of waste sorrounding heart) 14. Kanthopalepa (Adherence of waste sorrounding throat) 15. Dhamanipraticaya (Adherence of waste in dhamani) 16. Galaganda (Goiter) 17. Atisthaulya (Over obesity) 18. Sitagnita (Mildness of agni) 19. Udarda (Urticarial rashes) 20. Svetavabhasata (Pale look) 21. Sveta mutranetravarcastva (White discolouration of urine eyes, stool) , TH AMIS FAH (Raktaja Nandtmaja Vikara) Tea welisen @ agi | sited a fred dtst aera Sa I S.S.Pit 7/125-127 Raktaja Nanatmaja vikara’s are as follows— 1. Gaurava (Heaviness) 2. Raktamandalata (Red circular patches) 3. Rakta netratva (Redness in eyes) 4. Rakta mitrata (Redness in urine) 5. Raktanisthivana (Splitting mucous with blood) 6. Rakta pidaka (Red boils) 7. Ausnya (Excess heat) 8 9 10. . Putigandhataé (Foul smell from th uti e bod . Pidda (pain) ) Paka (Inflammation) caret aPiedt BY (Vyadhi Nanatve Hetu) Diseases are said to be _ Di one based on pain mechani which is common in all disorders. ° C. Su 2678. Vyadhi 183 - a uarafteiaten fren waft fe ar auf ArT Beara: | aaeUTETTT Tat sen TyCY HAE: | TUT spit + renters? | C.Su 18/42-43 Diseases are said to be innumerable in number depending upon their distinctive cardinal features like pain, colour, etio- logical factors, site of origin and name of the disease. To sys- tematize the science certain diseases are described in detail. The same principle may be adopted in other cases, where it has not been explained. fart: PRafiestan:, wEafrorafergrerateencs fase ‘afer C.Su 20/3 Diseases are said to be innumerable due to various etio- logical agents like immediate causes or distant causes, dusyas like dhatu, mala etc. symptomatology, incompatible dietetics & activities and permutation and combination of various frac- _tions of dosas and dusyds etc. all which partake in the develop- ment of various disorders. That’s why it is very difficult to re- strict the classification of diseases with numerable numbers only. That’s why Caraka said that physician should not be ashamed if he is unable to nomenclate the disease because it is not always possible to name all types of diseases in definite terms. Aggravated dosas manifest many disorders depending on the various etiological factors and origin of disease. In such circumstances physician should try to identity the nidana | pafcaka of diseases and accordingly one has to plan the line of treatment. Four types of diseases qgaret AA aT aqfaat: 1. C.Su 18/41 Four kinds of diseases sadhya, asddhya, mrdu and daruna. thrant (Roga Marga) sat derant sft green, watfeer FTA: HSA 1C. Sie 11/48 i
184 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Three kinds of roga margas are mentioned namely sakha, - marmasthi sandhi and kostha. wat art ar ara rant (Sakha Marga or Bahya Roga Marga) (External path of disease) : TA UNG THe TaaeeER a, T aTat Tran: 1 . C.Su 11/48 Sakha marga includes diseases of raktadi dhatus and tvak and it is also called bahya roga marga. Raktédi means mamsa, meda, asthi, majjd, Sukra. FIRST Teles: US oar Aft aera ast ARTE: | C.Su 11/48 (Gangadhara) Sakha includes 6 dhadtus and tvak, all the seven are in- cluded in one path i.e. bahya roga marga. TaeH Ait We UST ITA CATA | C.Su 11/48 (Gangadhara) The word tvak (skin) has been designated because any changes in the rasa are presses in skin. qarreaca warearsst aque: 1 C.Su 11/48 (Gangadhara) Almost all the diseases which arise out of bahya roga marga are easy to cure. Diseases Te Msfisarmadngientmia waa SScrsTea fra afeationra fardvang yeni faxeaea: vrererftun waa WT: 1 C.Su 11/49 The following diseases are considered under bahya roga marga. Tost AUrVitea A BW AEATES: | (Ganhgadhara) © Ganda (Inflammatory reaction) © Pidaka (Pimple) Vyadhi 185 Alaji (Boil) Apaci (Scrofula) Carmakila (Sentinel pile) Adhimamsa (Granuloma) Masaka (Moles) Kustha (Various dermatological disorders including lep- eoee#eee rosy) e Vyanga (freckles) Extrenal variety of Visarpa (Herpes infections) Svayathu (Oedema) Gulma (abdominal growths) Argéa (haemorroides) Vidradhi (External abscess) Ajagallika (Skin disorders) Gandalaji (Diseases of face) mere thranf at watfterate tt art (Madhyama Roga or Marmasthi Sandhi Roga Marga) (Internal path of disease) aaifir gaditr eqaqefdit, sifterrerdtsfercitreniia | Fromage FY Hvst:, A wea Tran: 1 ‘C.Su 11/48 1, Diseases of vital organs like basti, hrdaya, murdhd are. included under madhyama roga marga. 2. Diseases of asthi, sandhi, asthi related structures, snayu and kandara are comes under .madhyama roga marga: Tete saat ag WT Papers warty | C.Su 11/48 (Gangadhara) Madhyama roga marga diseases are difficult to cure. Diseases Watered ergs Tse eee TS AIT: frizaha trreava aerramigenkont waa tet: 1 c.Su 11/49 14Vik. & Roga
186 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Paksavadha (Hemiplegia or stroke) Paksagraha (Tonic convulsions) Apatanaka (Clonic convulsions) Ardita (facial paralysis or bell’s palsy) Sosa (Consumption) Rajayaksma (Pulmonary tuberculosis) Asthi sila (Pain in bones) Sandhi Sula (Pain in joints) Guda bhramsa (Prolapse of rectum) Hikka (Hiccough) eeeoe7eeeeeoe8e @ eA aT atari (Abhyantara or Kostha Marga) (Interual path of the disease) wate vredera, a terart sera: | C.Su 11/49 Kostha marga is also known as maha srotas (gastro intes- tinal tract), Sarira madhya (central portions of the body), mahdnimna (deep or internal part of the body), Gma-pakvasaya (stomach & intestines). It is also called Gbhyantara roga marga (Internal path of the disease). Other synonyms mentioned by Gangddhara are as fol- lows—udara, mahasaranischidra, mahagarta. Prognosis of Internal Path of Diseases Ore THe: | eae Ras: aA Tere AM cat verter wala | C.Su 11/48 (Gangadhara) It is the third path of disease and prognosis of internal path of diseases become either curable or difficult to cure or manageable or inciirable disease depending on their manifes- tations. Diseases cerofrarcessiorerafirgferent are verafieenraterttar- Diseases of Sira (head), hrdaya (heart), basti (bladder) Vyadhi 187 matssabionga fradvaag yeaa: arorgertcen vata wT: | C.Su 11/49 Jvara (Fever) Atisara (Diarrhoea) Chardi (Vomiting) Alasaka (Internal torper) Visucika (Choleric diarrhoea) Kdsa (Cough) Svasa (Dyspnoea) Hikka (Hiccough) Anaha (Constipation) Udara (Diseases of the abdomen) Pltha (splenic disorders) Internal variety of e Visarpa (Herpes infections) e Svayathu (Oedema) e@ Gulma (Internal abdominal growths) e Arsa (Piles) e Vidhradhi (Internal abscess) Conclusion External path of the disease includes raktadhi 6 dhatus and tvak. The term sakha@ has been used to illustrate the nature of tissue elements like blood etc. which are like a branch of a tree. The tvak (skin) includes rasa because any changes in the rasa are expressed in skin. The rakta belonging to liver and spleen may be included under internal path because Susruta included liver and spleen as kosthanga. The main purpose behind explanation of path is that in order to facilitate the prognosis of the disease and also to iden- tify the various path to plan the treatment accordingly. Gare caer (Contagious diseases) Sankramaka diseases are those which spreads from one person to another person.
188 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Etiology sitrattier “Wriva AeMPT AML! SN 5/33-34 ' Sankramaka diseases are those which manifest due to sin- ful acts and spreads to other person by following causes are as follows. e Constant close intimacy with the patient Touching the patient oftenly Inhaling expired air of the patient Eating. together Sleeping and sitting together Wearing dress, garlands and unguents used by conta- gious patient Diseases e Kustha (Various dermatological disorders including lep- rosy) - e Jvara (Various fevers) © Sosa (Pulmonary tuberculosis or AIDS?) ‘@ Netrabhisyanda (Conjunctivitis) e Aaupasargika diseases like Sithilika (Nibanda sangraha), masurika (Nyaya candrika), Sinful diseases (Madhukosa), Evil spirits like balagraha etc., romanthya, - granthi, visarpa, upadamsa, kandu SEMA (Vyadhyasraya) VyadhaSraya means location of the disease in a body. we wee earefarmeeiiaa: | aa Gari, aneq Wari envi wa (C.Su 1/55) Diseases are localised both in body and mind. Both body and mind are responsible for pleasures, this can be achieved by proper regimens. Example— Vyadhi 189 Diseases located in Sarira e Kustha e Jvara e Atisara etc. Diseases located in manas e Kama @ Moha e Irshya etc. Diseases located both in body & mind — e Unmada e Atatvabhinivesa e Apasmara etc. Satva (mind), atma (self) and Sarira (body) are consid- ered as tripod, on which living being stands i.e. purusa. It is responsible for disease, happiness, unhappiness, discomfort etc.
Chapter 9 3A (Ama) sea wread Ura Sit BTA: | Ama is the outcome of improper digestion So weae Gerd Bla airA: Incomplete or partial digestion of food leads to dma waa Usa tdtagqEel ara sist sr: 1 Product which brings discomfort in srotas is dma amended faerie: arafghad gear C.Ci 15/73-74 Abnormal dosa present in grahani manifest improperly digested food as result salivations, constipation, pain, burning sensation, anorexia and heaviness manifest as symptoms of ama. sme fagiraaata arafeigieany 1 C.Ci 15/73-74 (Cakrapani) Symptoms of undigested food material is the symptoms of ama. Tt Ta Bit Bea TA | STATA US BS:, STENTAET Taare YR Sa | C.Ci 15/73-74 (Cakrapani) Sama rasa means improperly processed substance or tis- sues. It is the sama rasa which circulates all over the body not the adhya rasa. STTATYTACA: wraTaeteeratearfert: | arg ame emg: aw osm gia atta: 1 M.Ni 25/1-5 (Madhukosa) If kayagni fails to perform normal functions leads to accu- Be Ama 191 mulation of undigested food material inside a@magaya, which is the initial rasadhadtu is called ama. Serge ori oag = fate PeTOTATT geafeeitad | M.Ni 25/1-5 (Madhukosa) | Food which is improperly digested having foul smell, ex- cess unctuousness and develops lethargy in all body organs is called ama. MENSA TH: Fel a A vedtsfrevaanrd | a yt wate = geafteitads M.Ni 25/1-5 (Madiukosa) Due to hypofunctioning of agni proper digestion of food doesn’t takes place leading to formation of ama, which is re- sponsible for the manifestation of almost all diseases. arma «=f, «= Shey TEI PU a a Ce Ce M.Ni 25/1-5 (Madhukosa) : e Some people accept ama as improperly digested food. @ Some other scholars considers accumulated mala. as ama. e Others says that it is the primary stage for the vitiation of dosa. wate ddirar «sfaeaeq at ta: | a osmget 8 ad ae wala | C.Ci. 15/44 (Hemadri) | Impaired digestion and metabolism due to hypofunctioning of jatharagni is called dma and it excacerbates all the dosa. Ue CCL Oe Seareanrgreannt Tara waa | A.H.Su, 13/25
192 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Due to weakness in agni ddhya rasa becomes ‘immature, improperly metabolised substance called Gma, which manifests in amdasaya. set aest ERTS util C.C. 15/44 (Gangadhara) — eerafafe (aaa) RUA | C.C. 15/44 (Cakrapani) Partially digested food transformed into sourness is called ama. UGEMaSAMT FRACAENISA Taal ataah at Teas C.Vi. 2/8 (Cakrapani) Disturbed functions of agni leads to formation of underprocessed anna rasa and which is immature is called ama. ary ater A.H.Su. 13/26 Others opine that Gma forms after mixing with agitated - dosas like a formation of poison after mixing with various kinds of kodrava. ain Arrant waferset waders 11 s.ur. 56/10 Wherever dma goes it gives rise to pain and initiates reac- tions among dosas, dusyas, srotas etc. present in that particular area and it can be understood by the presence of symptoms due to G@ma. “STAT GT a wale (Ama Dosa or Ama Pradosa) aTamalitt amasrageared ta qa: wate ser: | C.Ci. 2/8 (Gangadhara) The resulting action of dma inside the body is called ama dosa. aa deat mit aan om 1 C.Ci. 2/8 (Cakrapani) ee Ama : 193 Manifestation of certain reactions inside the body due to underprocessed anna rasa is called Gma pradosa. When ama comes in contact with dosa leading to vitiation of Sarira by manifesting various kinds of: diseases. 3a Wats Az (Ama Pradosa Bheda) — @ fafeerarrmatanrerara fererst: frgfrcat se A | C.Vi. 2/10 Mainly two types of @mapradosa manifests namely visucika and alasaka. ala (Sama) amt oat MTT GI afi: | an seaport 8 a thietgea: 1 A.H.Su. 13/24 Sama is a condition manifests due to amalgamation of dosa and dusya resulting into formation of various kinds of disor- ders. arafaa (Amavisa) K.Khi. 16/7-9 Due to the consumption of nidana, which are capable of excacerbating dosa and bringing mildness in agni’s, after this whatever is again eaten or drunk by ignoramous person, the same becomes improperly digested, this transformed into sour- ness in Gm@saya is called dmavisa. freareyrntoigrenier: gremdanraters ficeragt fares: |
194 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiina.-& Roga Vijfiana C.Vi, 2/12 If person consumes incompatible foods, eat before the di- gestion of previous meals, during the state of indigestion, what- ever is taken by the individual at this stage gets transformed to sourness, which liberates certain poisons in Gmasaya lead- ing to manifestation of symptoms of food poisoning. Which is incurable, onset become insidious and treatment becomes antagonist. Antagonisity of treatment is due to changes in the qualities of Gma and amavisa. freauarmentata amtern agit frat afgatreny, wet ferardarar vite fart wares ii | C.Vi. 2/12 (Cakrapani) Treatment becomes antagonist because if hot substances employed for the management of dma condition, then ama visa excacerbates, if cold substances given, which enhances ama condition. Due to contradiction in the lines of treatment of both the condition, prognosis becomes difficult or incurable. 3A SeaRt BY (Ama Utpatti Hetu) 4 @ Gq Sant wean uisarmde weresha, aif g Gd We sa vit yes fee faefia facegia feearnm art VR swaed, art wile vie deeaigtieatan wate Ae al AGA SEE, AIA wgUare | CVI, 2/8 Consumption of food substances in excess, along with not following the rules and regulation of dietetic described under astavidha ahara vifesayatana leads to formation of Gma. Intake of food in improper time, which are too heavy, unc- tuous, cold, dry, despicable, constipative, irritant, unclean and naturally contradictory leads to development of dma. Eating food when person afflicted with passion, anger, greed, confusion, envy, bashfullness, grief, indigestion, anxi- ety and fear. we ee Ama 195 © Caraka said that intake of wholesome food in proper quan- tity do not get properly digested when the individual is afflicted with grief, fear, anger, sorrows, excessive sleep and excessive vigil. Dosa prakapa etiological factors also play an important role in the manifestation of ama. : QA MaTT (Biophysical Properties of Ama) _ fokoot ant wqreqaaypet ihe gene A.H.Su 13/26 (Sarvangasundara) Liquid, heavy (high molecular weight), attain different colours, etiological factor for almost all diseases, slimy, viscid, thready, sticky nature, manifests various kinds of pain, yields foul smell, increased sourness, excess in quantity, thick, in- creased turbidity, obstruct various pathways etc. Production of Ama at various levels It manifests due to ' 1. Jatharagni Mardavata— Sluggish impaired functions of Jatharagni. 2. Dhatvagni Daurbalya— Altered functions of dhkatvagni. 3. Bhutagni Mandyata—_ Defect in the functions of bhutagni. Biomorphic Pathogenic Structure of Ama and Their Classification When @ma mixes with dosa, dhatu, mala (ahatu mala and éarira mala) develops certain complex adverse reactions, which _ is the basis for the manifestation of diseases. dma and sama are the main two classification. Sama and nirama state of dosa, dhdtu and mala may be classified in a following manner are as follows
.196 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Sama rasadhGtu malarupi | Nirama rasadhdtu malarupi kapha kapha Sama raktadhatu malarupi | Nirama raktadhatu malarupi pitta pitta Sama mamsadhatu malarupi \ Nirama mamsadhatu kha-mala malarupi kha-mala Sama medadhatu malarupi | Nirama medadhatu malarupi sveda sveda Sama asthidhatu malarupi | Nirama asthidhdtu malarupi kesa, loma & nakha keSa, loma & nakha Sama majjadhatu malarupi | Nirama majjadhatu malarupi snehamsa in aksi, vit tvaca | snehamsa in aksi, vit tvaca Sama §ukradhatu malarupi | Nirdma gukradhatu malarupi ojas ojas Sama rasa ; Nirama rasa : Ama 197 aa qatar (Prodromal features of Ama) Wiremefarigrnsaregeats the: 1 Teresa ot a ate Freer: 1 Tat: Re sae aa: | amet = ocorfit =o faender «= ufarera: 1 K.Su. 25/32-33 Prodromal symptoms of ama are stiffness, anorexia, ex- cessive sleep, excessive pallor, dullness, continuous aversion from play, food, sleep; wet nurse, has appearance of bathed when unbathed and vice versa. ' BF HT AAT HAW (General symptoms of Ama) ait tiene yeM: | srrerenaite Presta veregi- eferercr: | fey ari... A.H.Su. 13/23-24 Obstruction in srotas, diminution of strength, heaviness, disturbance in the normal movements of vata, drowsiness, indi- gestion, excessive secretions from oral cavity, obstruction for urine and stool, lack of desire towards food, exhaustion. Specific symptomatology of Ama GAATA CAV (Sama Vata Laksana) ay: amit faaenire eet get: | A.H.Su. 13/27-28 (Praksipta) Obstruction for mala, mitra, diminished functions of agni, stiffness, increased bowel. sounds, pain all over the body along with swelling and gradually manifest malaize all over the body.
198 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana The agitated vayu circulates all over the body and produces diseases when favourable situation arises. Anointing body both externally and internally, sunrise, cloudy season and night, ag- gravates ama condition. ad a owed wi waite tra: feraentirentere viesiterfies: 2 Hoare afgatasras ai qe fairer og weet = fanedar A.Hr.Ni. 16/29-30 When vata amalgamate with Gma produces stupor, inac- tiveness, feeling of heaviness, unctuousness, loss of power of agni, anorexia, lassitude, feeling of coldness, swelling, desire to take pungent and dry things and gets relieved by such fac- tors. Nirama state can be understood opposite to above symptomatology. FRIAaTA AAT (Nirama Vata Laksana) frat fawet «set Piidasitsea dat: | fata qi: writ fereaife faye: | A.H.Su. 13/27-28 (Praksipta) Symptoms of nirdma vata are clear, transparent, dry, free from obstruction to normal movements of vata, mild pain, sub- sides by vata alleviating therapies like oleation. Brahe Gaol (Sama Pitta Laksana) A.H.Su. 13/27-28 (Praksipta) Sama pitta laksanas are foul, smell, colour is either green- ish or light blackish, sour taste, doesn’t spread in water, heavy, sour eructations, burning sensation in throat and cardiac region. Ama 199 Fra feet ernt (Nirama Pitta Laksana) srardtaargai w memafeet | we fame fata ofa uke aemeaz A.H.Su, 13/27-28 (Praksipta) Nirama pitta laksanas are slight coppery and yellowish colour, markedly increased warmthness, pungent taste, which spreads and mixes with water easily, doesn’t yield bad smell, enhances taste, appetite and strength. GM Bh Taw (Sama Kapha Laksana) afar: war: ws ewsafrsd | amt wert quite: ager faardaa' A.H.Su. 13/27-28 (Praksipta) Increased turbidity in stool, urine and other waste sub- stances of the body, thready, thick, stagnates in the, throat, foul smell, complete lack of appetite and obstruct eructations. FRTA HH WAT (Nirama Kapha Laksaya) tar faftsr: unghatiswray wa al wa: 8 wa faaaweay anmafaa: | A.H.Su. 13/27-28 (Praksipta) Niradma kapha laksands are froathy, free from threads, pallor, clear light substance, free from foul smell, which is prop- erly digested and cleanses oral cavity. FRA ST MANCVT SIT (Nirdma Laksanas in general) seceeeeeePARPATOT FATA: A.H.Su. 13/23-24 Symptoms opposite to dma are the niradma laksanas like no obstruction in channels, regaining strength, lightness, vara moves freely in its own path, active, proper digestion, no ex- cessive secretions from oral cavity, no obstruction for. urine, stool, flatus; desire to take food, free from exhaustion.
200 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana MA THEN Cal (Sama Rasadhatu Laksana) sagt a oaefasreaacenfiaraaat | weer «owWta war armel vate: i asisiwaarenret aca: ufemt a Taretast THT: | C.Su. 28/9-10 Sama rasa laksanas are as follows— lack of interest to- wards food, anorexia, bitter taste in mouth, unable to perceive ‘taste sensation, nausea, feeling of heaviness, drowsiness, gen- eral malaize, fever, feeling of complete darkness, pallor, ob- struction in body channels, impotency, exhaustion, reduction in strength, emaciation, loss of functions of agni, premature graying of hairs and appearance of wrinkles. WTA THAT TAU (Sama Raktadha@tu Laksana) aed tretan: | ats fad fis waft: Wedges wfte yedise fafa: 1 diferent aren et fecraftacrarcran: | agyerigeny fara orm cilera Busey | THIET | C.Su. 28/11-12 Various dermatological disorders including leprosy, herpes infections, pimples, hemorrhages (both internally and enternally), bleeding from genital organs, inflammation of anus, penis and oral cavity; splenic disorders, internal growths, blue moles, liver disorders, freckles, portwine mark, blackmoles, ring- worm, dermatitis, leucoderma, papules, urticarial rashes, red rounded patches are the sythptoms of sama rakta. ATA AAA AV (Sama Marhsadhatu Laksana) C.Su. 28/13-14 Ama 201 Hypertrophy of muscles, soft tissue sarcomas, sentinel pile, inflammation of the uvula, tonsilitis, sloughing of flesh, boils or skin eruptions, goiter, cervical adenitis and inflammation of epigiottis are the symptoms of sama mamsa. art Ag MY MIT (Sama Medadhatu Lakgana) Resa wae | fafeamit wert yeeurfor af wl Cs. 28/15 Astanindita purusa (i.e. too tall, too short, over hairy, hair- less, too black, over fair, over obese, over emaciation) and pre- monitory symptoms of prameha are the symptoms of sama meda. SuSruta included various benign and malignant tumours, internal growths, enlargement of scroatum, goiter, accumulation of meda in lips, urological disorders including diabetes mellitus, obesity, excessive perspiration. S.Su. 24/9 Ms sifeaergy MAN (Sama Asthidhatu Laksana) arafen edt aanftertagyers feravter BUC RaAAQa Te SaaTAST: | C.Su. 28/16 Hypertrophy of bone and teeth, bone sarcomas, pain in teeth and bone, discolouration, morbidity in hairs, nail, beard and moustaches are the symptoms of sama asthi laksana. AF ASST TAU (Sama Majjadhatu Laksana) wee ude wat yet ast areca | Tet we wet a ah) C.su. 28/17-18 Pain in joints, giddiness, fainting, darkness infront of eye, deep seated wounds in joints, inflammation in eyes are the symp- toms of sama majja. AA WHA TAN (Sama Sukradhatu Laksana) WRT etary SURTAELTT | Th ot acitemeary feed ar ware 1 15 Vik. & Roga
202 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana a are sad ws: cata werent wap fe ge aot wet aed Al C.Su. 28/18-19 Impotency, sexual dysfunction (both in male and female), his progeny will be sick, impotent or short lived and disfigured, no conception or if conception there will be abortion or miscar- riage. Thus the afflicted Sukra manifests infertility and brings misery to his entire family. OIA Ta Cal (Sama Mittra Laksanas) The following characteristic properties indicates sama con- dition of mitra are as follows. 1. If drop of tila-taila floats over urine surface but not spreads indicates disease become difficult to cure. 2. If tila-taila drop sinks in urine indicates incurability of the diseases. 3. Increased frequency and micturation. 4. Increased turbidity. 5. When it mixes with dosas, dhadtus and other malds lead- ing to manifestation of various urological disorders. 6. Pain and discomfort in the mitravaha srotas. 7. Change in colour, consistency and specific gravity. 8. Sometimes urine comes out with difficulty. 9 . Develops discomfort in mitravaha srotoavayava. SM GUT MV (Sama Purisa Laksana) wostfadhthaparerrecaciatt 1 gag ag aif fake urreyari sue. 40/17 j. When it combines with dosas, dhatus and other malas manifests diseases accordingly. 2. Sinks in water. 3. Increase in quantity and frequency. 4. Foul smell. 5. Change in colour and consistency. Ama 203 6. Little quantity comes out oftenly with difficulty with sound. 7. Discomfort in purisavaha srotoavayava,. 8. Heaviness and pain in abdomen. GIT FAT HIT (Sama Sveda Laksana) . Excessive perspiration or absence of persipration. . Roughness. . Excessive smoothness of body. . Burning sensation in skin. . Foul smell. . Itching. SNUBPWN srotas. FART FA AI (Nirama Mittra Laksana) wafeutt wet Tatar | fared fame ocaissiva |= gerard i S.S.Ci. 12/20 1. Normal quantity with normal frequency. 2. Attains normal colour and consistency. 3. No pain and discomfort in mitravaha sroto avayava. Frm atte Mat (Nirama Purisa Laksana) wra gq fam fart aa 7a wread a aera ae oud fares 1. No Amalgamation with dosas, dhdtus and with other malas. 2. Normal quantity with normal frequency. 3. Attains normal colour and frequency. 4. Purisa comes out without difficulty. 5. Feeling of lightness. fri Caz MAI (Nirama Sveda Laksana) 1. Normal perspiration. ts . Manifests derangement in the functions of svedavaha Aiegsertemr rnin inten one Et
204 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana . No roughness. . No burning sensation. . No itching. . Free from foul smell from the body. OT TRNAS es ART (Qualities of Rasa Dhatu Malarupi Kapha) * C.Ci 18" Chapter When rasa dhdtu malarupi kapha combines with ama pro- . duces following symptoms. 1. 3[& HA— Dry cough 2. @ @h— Cough with sputum 3. saenot fret was— Expectorates sputum mixed with pitta : 4. age aE fers frdtaft HH wa! Large amount of thick sputum comes out which is sweet in taste and unctuous: Sputum comes out mixed with pus, which yields foul smell, colour is green or red in colour. 6. fafext sect fast sft dante aormart tH aed fedtaf wary c.Ci. 8/51 Patient of rajayaksma spits out sputum which is slimy, large in quantity, viscus, putrid smell, green, white or yellow in colour. 7. UFX GH— Thick sputum ABWNY S.U. 52/10 Wt THT werate fier MAW (Qualities of Raktadhatu Malarupi Pitta) 1, Weg ats etary ant agesteafa a agi | C.Ci. 16/11 Colour of the skin changed to various colours like pallor, deep yellow, greenish discolouration. + Ama . 205 2. PUNE Wa SASINIFAL | C.Ci. 16th Chapter Colour of the skin changed to blackish pale and afflicted area becomes rough and red. 3. ats Ae: a ast Ofte: | Ted == Wenaif........ 4 C.Ci. 17/34-35 Colour changed to yellow in eyes and becomes deep yel- lowish discolouration in skin, nails, face; urine and stool colour changed to red and yellow and person looks like a frog. Difference between Ama Rasa and Ama Visa . Manifest after the formation of ama, if person adopts imp- roper dietetic and behaviour pattern. Ama Rasa 1. Manifest due to weakness in agni 2. It manifest is amaSaya. . It manifests in @magaya and spreads to all over body quickly like poison 3. Responds to principle treatment of ama . Doesn’t respond to principle treatment of dma due to antagonicity in the lines of treatment of Gma with amavisa i.e. hot therapies con] ducive to Gma but aggravates dma visa and cold therapies conducive to dma visa but aggravates ama. 4. Gradual manifestation 4. Acute in onset 5. Diseases become curable, |5. Disease becomes incurable incurable or curable with difficulty
206 _Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana 6. Involvement of dosds, dusyas and srotas either singly or in combination and accordingly it mani- fest diseases. - Involvement of all the dosas, dhatus, malas along with in- volving two or more srotas. . Pathogenesis may be superficial or deep seated. . Always deep seated - Morbid kapha dosa laksanas mimic with dma, that’s why it mainly targets kapha sthdnds and later spreads to all the sites. 9. Condition may not be fatal | 9. Condition may become fatal and it may kill the individual. 10. It can be managed 10.Don’t treat other wise you will successfully loose name and fame. Critical evaluation of Ama . It targets all the tissues. The main factor for the formation of ama is deranged func- tions of agnis. Ama develops inside the Gmagaya. If it remains for longer duration in dm@aya in due course of time it attains suktatva, which is termed as dma pradosa or ama visa, The hazardous effects of @ma depends on the attainment of the de- gree of suktabhava, which decides the prognosis of diseases. Cakrapani clarified suktabhava as amlatva. 1. The dietetic indiscretions and emotional stress may im- pair the effective. functioning of the neurohumoral mechanisms as a result Gma develops inside the body. 2. There are two main factors supposed to play an important role in attaining Sukt@pdka are~ (i) The hyposecretion of digestive juices and (ii) Diminished or sluggish gastro intestinal motility. 3. Fermentation may relate to the starch or carbohydrate on oe Ama 207 inside the body, which may develop foul odour and extreme pastiness with increased mucous. 4, The term mala sancaya may be used to. designate ama and sama. The word mala has two implications i-e. egest and the by product of metabolism i.e. metabolic waste products i.e. malas not properly eliminated or utilized by the body. 5.Ama, Gmadosa and Gmavisa plays an vital role in the pathogenesis as well as prognosis of diseases. 6. Certain chemical compounds in the body does damage which accumulates to produce ageing are called free radicals. This may be considered as ama. 7. Abnormal increase in the normal values of blood, urine, stool, semen, sputum, cerebrospinal fluid, salivary juice. etc may be understood as ama condition. . : 8. If dma manifests in excess body tries to eliminate either through upper channels or through lower channels or with both by- manifesting acute condition. 9. Direct influence of @ma observed in Gmavdata, vata rakta, grahani dosa, kasa, rajayaksma, pandu, kamala, kustha etc.
Chapter 10 STAIGETd (Janapadadhvamsa) Introduction _ SEM SPREReeenerand far tae 1 frites - Fafa fear C.Vi 3/1 (Gangadhara) Janapada means by which mass people get afflicted with diseases and destroy the whole region. . fafeet tgenftere: wifi waft cremuitseencors | at Treat wierd Aca Ae ARTETA ATT C.Vi 3/1 (Cakrapani) Causative factors of the diseases can be classified into two kinds i.e. (i) those factors pertaining to individual (sadharana) and (ii) those common to living beings in general (as@dharana). Person who doesn’t follow the rules and regulation of diet along with erratic behaviour leads to aggravation of vatadi dosds and manifest the diseases in that individual. Other causative factors like vitiated air, water, land and season affect several individuals residing in that locality is called janapadadhvamsa. , farmrenaa: meme wi aq wet fapa arenfeqnadtana we: 1 A.S.Su 9/70-72 . Diseases that manifest in a locality by the same source i.e. due to vitiation of land, water, air etc. is called janapada _dhvamsa. nspite of consuming different food, habit, age, con- Janapadadhvamsa 209 stitution person gets affected by one and the same disease due to abnormal water, air etc. These abnormalities are due to ab- normal movement of planets, calamities, which occur naturally in the earth, atmosphere and the sky. The cause of epidemics is effect of sinful acts of people who are residing in the epidemic prone area. Waqeedet aa (Causative Factors for Epidemics) How the diseases manifest to the whole locality even then people residing in that area are of different constitution, age, sex, physical strength, homologation, mental faculties? For this question lord Atreya answered to AgniveSa. i.e. THenfetraeqeaon Asal Ma: AMATO SAAT: war fagiee anes fara sareqeedaara 1 ag afeart Wal: AMA wAIaG Haft: AIA AY:, Sach, SVT: cHret Sher | C.Vi 3/6 Even then there is a development of disease to the whole region inspite of having different constitution etc. It is due to certain factors which are common to all individuals and their vitiation brings abnormality in the whole country with same set of symptomatology leading to destruction of that particular re- gion is called janapadadvamsa. Common factors which are essential to all inhabitants of a country are water, air, land and seasons. Aastra Seed a [Air Epidemic (Janapadadvamsa due to Vata Dusta)} . Tiracrrersatesiraanmafraaaearfaer-araraanreatcttd- meee poser reraraaanangy peat | C.Vi 3/6 Air becomes injurious to mass people due to its vitiation are as follows—
210 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana ' @ Absence of fresh healthy air in accordance with season e Excessive moisture in air Excessive violent blow of air Excessive dryness in air Excessive cold air Excessive hot air Excessive roughness or humidity in air Air which brings obstruction in channels Agitated air with terrible sound Clash between air, which comes from different direc- tions e Excessive whisling with the capacity to create whirl e Polluted with unwholesome smell, vapour, gravels, ashes and smoke WRT VAIEA (Water Epidemic (Janapadadvamsa due to Dusta Jala) quafurstererernifraraannyyt end C.Vi 346 Water becomes contaminated and manifests diseases to the whole community in that locality. The nature of contaminated water are as follows— ° Enormous changes in smell, colour, taste and touch in comparison to normal pure water e Excessive stickiness in water e Deserted by aquatic birds © Reduction of acquatic animals in water. © Which gives unpleasantness due to its contamination In Astanga Sangraha along with above, the following also included. e Water comes from bad or polluted area e Reservoirs are dried out A.S.Su 9/74-75 Janapadadhvamsa 211 ara wAUeeag (Land Epidemic (Janapadadvamsa due to Dusta Desa) avi a: a aitga SIs Wea Bieri wep seeletT epiigniaerasd warty ageTpacoatrrySe TEES TAT DeAMARRTOSPE va. ya Mea aaaaermafay ARETE oF AACS ATA TUT ATS PFT TEMA Tet eT- urafrata opftrencrafat war cers Rar araTeUTfere eer Teach ERAT AMMAN fre ATCA ATT TET ATT Freestar yee agi entedt fererg | CVI 56 Characteristic properties of the land indicating its contami- nation are as follows— e Abnormal changes in colour, smell, taste and touch of the sand in comparison to normal sand e Excessive moisturess in land e Land is full of serpents, wild animals, mosquitoes, lo- custs, flies, rats, owls, vultures, jackals etc. Land is full of grass, creepers and diffusing plants Land appears to look differently : Land is full of fallen, dried, damaged crops Land is sorrounded by smoky winds Land witnesses wild cries of birds and dogs Bewilderment and painful disposition of various ani- mals & birds e Perversion or dishonesty to different religion, truth, modesty, manners, conduct, behaviour and other such merits e Continous agitation and overflow of rivers or reservoirs e Frequent natural occurence of calamities like meteor- ites, thunder bolts and earthquakes e Land is full of fierce look and cries in nature e Sun, moon and stars witness changes frequently like appearance of roughness, coppery, reddish, white and cloudy. Sometimes it looks as if they are covered with a net of clouds
212 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiidna e Land is filled with confusion, excitement, torture, cry- ing and full of darkness © Land is full of abnormal painful crying sounds as if it is seized by.demons (Guhyaka) Astanga Sangraha included the following points~ A.S.Su 9/75 . * © Land is full of unhealthy foods and herbs e Land witnessess various frequent natural calamities HITT FAIL (Season Epidemic (Janapadadvarisa due to Dusta Kala) \ C.Vi 3/6 The following points indicates abnormal seasons are as fol- lows— e Appearance of features contrary to normal season like excessive manifestation of symptoms or deficient manifesta- tion of symptoms or abnormal appearance of features in re- spective seasons. For example— Extreme summer in summer or Lack of summer in summer or Appearance of rain, cold in summer. Astanga Samgraha mentioned the following points. Effect of Janapadadvamsa Contaminated air, water, land and season are difficult to avoid: because they are, powerfully bad in their succeeding or- der and their effects are also unpredictable. A.S.Su 9/77 Country may be completely destructed by the polluted air, water, land and season because these manifest various dreadful diseases. These diseases can be managed with difficulty with proper assurance and medicaments. Janapadadhvamsa 213 Vitiation of land, season, air and water in order to under- stand their importance. By nature these four are indispensible in their progressive order. e Vitiation of jala is more important than vata © Vitiation of dega is more important than jala e Vitiation of season is more important than dea. The above statements signifies the gravity of the latter in the development of epidemics. It may be possible to protect against polluted air by not exposing to it but he cannot so eas- ily avoid polluted water. Even polluted water may also be avoided with certain amount of proper care but it is not pos- sible to keep away from the land because the presence of living being resides in land. Upto some extent polluted land also avoided by changing the place but it is not possible to guard against the ill effects of seasons.
Chapter 11 Sasq (Upadrava) TRAY UY Wiktaent tat wt wa wypisyal THM Wea FRM: | C.Ci 21/40 One which occurs in the course of some other disease, althouth it may result from the main disease. This morbid pro- cess occuring during a disease may be a minor or major ail- ment. It is called upadrava. Wa, Sasa Tris sas =a: | M.Ni 1/2 (Madhukosa) It is the morbid event which develops by the factors which are responsible for the manifestation of main disease. It may be due to excessive aggravation of dosa, dusya etc. earereat a enfisiararrnrcra: | samaeteh SM BRA TM 1 Mi 1/2 (Madhukosa) It is an episode which develops after the manifestation of main disease and subsides by giving treatment to main disease. Treatment is not antagonistic to main disease. ataafites ar a: atest café serrarennit cation, T Way Walesa Ua: i S.Su 35/18 The word aupasargika used here as synonym to upadrava. It denotes that disease which manifests upon another disease is’ called upadrava and it manifests due to the same factors which are responsible for the manifestation of main disease. sane sft Fem: 1 C.Ci 21/40 (Cakrapani) ; Upadrava means which manifest after the genesis of main disease. This episode has been super imposed, altering symp- Upadrava 215 toms and modifying its course as a result disease may become difficult for management. Which is very close to main disease. It manifests after the main disease or during the disease pro- cess, if powerful cause supersedes. Cakrapani says that the signs and symptoms of a disease which appear at different stages, especially, at the later stage of the disease should be consid- ered as the signs and symptoms of the original disease and not as complications. Different stages of a disease are invariably manifested during the process of pathogenesis and all these stages constitute a disease, but upadravas may or may not be manifested which represent a distinct stage of development in a disease. But if a disease manifest by powerful dosas, dusyas etc. then it is possible that the ailments which constitute upadrava may also get manifested right from the inception of the disease. Ta weit cartes: careeforyt TuRa:, TT WTA: WERT aera wae | ay disteted wala agengmeEarh anfeaittecre— PRR; Teas aa fran | C.Ci 21/40 It is called upadrava because it develops after the genesis of original disease. Original disease is predominant, upadrava ocurs secondary to it. It generally subsides once the main dis- ease cured. It modifies the course of the disease leading to worse condition because it is manifested in the body of the patient which is already debilitated due to affliction by main disease. Therefore treatment must be initiated instantaneously to allevi- ate upadrava. : want araeat (Vyadhi-avastha) When the dosa-dusya sammirchan@ takes place leading to formation of a disease, it follows a path consisting of onset, duration and progress or retrogression. In the period of dura- tion of the disease, different stages appear due to several fac- tors and they are called the stages of the disease or vyadhi avastha.
216 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana They. denote the changes which occur from time to time in a disease and depend on two opposite forces acting on the body. On one side these are factors responsible for increasing the dis- ease pathology. They are like contributory factors of vyadhi and the nature and strength of the etiological factors. On the other side, there are forces like vyadhiksamatva and appropri- ate fulfillment of pddacatustaya which are helpful in manag- ing and curing the disease. Tet weet AMS SERA 1 A.H.Su. 12/67 The factors like dusya, dega, bala, kala, anala, prakrti, vaya, satva, satmya, Ghara may favour either of these sides. When they are favourable for vyadhi, the pathology will progress and when they are helpful for treatment disease will subside. Understandng of vyddhi avastha is essential for the diagnosis of disease, determination of vyadhiksamatva, application of treatment, advice on food and behaviour, prognosis of the dis- ease etc. Treatment become successful after proper assessment ° of disease condition based on vy@dhi avastha. The changes which occur in a diasease produce different vyadhi avasthas in dosa, dusya, agni, Gma and srotas: I. Stages occuring due to changes in Dosa. a. SYAaTas (Dosa Paka) ae vei aeet wan wat ae: | seen a ied ater orenearony 11 M. Ni. 2/66-73 (Madhukosa) This condition is stated to be nirdma stage of dosa as a result diseases either cures completely or symptoms starts di- minishing gradually or agitated dosdas start coming towards kostha. It is the essential stage for the recovery of the disease. During dosapaka certains symptoms will manifest these are as follows. Upadrava 217 1. The symptoms of the dosds involving in the develop- ment of disease starts diminishing. 2. Patient feel lightness or sense of relaxation. 3. Fever will subside. 4. Sense organs receive their normal sensation and per- form norma! activities. b. Changes takes place in dosas as per various stages of kriyGkadla and the same was described in detail in kriydkala chapter. c. Vegavastha and avegavastha-The stage of attack and stage between the attacks of the disease. When the dosds attain Sammurchana with dhatus, malas as a result disease manifest and when sammirchana breaks person will be free from dis- ease. The stage in between the attacks i.e. avegavastha is a con- dition in which dosds remain increased and dormant in this stage and can produce disease when conditions become favourable to it. Such stages are observed in Tamaka Svasa, Apasmara, Visamajvara etc. The importance of the knowledge of these stages lies in the fact that during the attack the treat- ment may be directed towards correction of dosds, while avegavastha stage can be corrected by proper avoidance of etiological factors or by enhancing vyddhiksamatva. I. Stages Occuring Due to Changes in Dusya (Dhatugata Avastha) oo wee Wa MATA: VA: | S.Su. 23/15-16 If disease doesn’t treated as early as possible gradually it invades to deeper dhatus and destroys the normal functions of dhatu is called dhatugata avastha. This condition may be ob- served in any disorder. Involvement of latter dhdtus indicates severity of the disease. Examples : Dhdtugata jvara, Dhatugata Kustha, Vatarakta, Mastrika, Dhdtustha vataja vikara, 16 Vik. & Roga
- 218 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Dhatustha pittaja vikdra, Dhatustha kaphaja vikara. aTget atest WT (/Dhatustha Dosaja Roga (Diseases of dosas due to their entry into dhatus)] Diseases manifest due to entrance of disturbed dosds in the dhatus are as follows. EA ait SIT WI (Dhatustha Vata Dosaja Roga) 1. Disturbed vata dosa create abnormalities in the dhdtus are as follows ead arses Part aA Ta | vata MperRara | TH dt ea: wart aa wi fata Wea swieieearahary | wT aftren: ufsraftaget did THAT || msareans ferry, ditfrciareersat wert TL A.S.Su. 19/16 A.S.Ni. 15/11-17 wy wpe YT FM FM wT TA | sea men wa wdep wepferashe i wqreia: wan aaud apgeseafa: | 7m! weft Ret travanste 11 qay gedswef aueqieed = war Tes « afar areaannshe 11 Upadrava 219. Raiskacator aPagei = araamens: 1. saa: wa wR a ATkeepiaishe 11 fas usta senfe ga adaenfe ar) fapit smeaenie gece: aftdtster: 11 . Fs 3 ai waganitiga pat wages: 11 Garett age a fo aa fem araguiefreaet: vita: Urns | Waureparra: waive Waeat |) C. Ci 28/30-37 Rasa dhatu- If disturbed vata enters rasa dhatu it brings abnormalities in the skin such as cracks and roughness. Raktadhatu~ lf disturbed vata enters rakta dhatu it causes severe pain, loss of tactile sensation, hyper thermia, inflamma- tory changes, discolouration, ulceration, stasis of food inside the gastrointestinal tract for longer period, anorexia, emacia- tion and giddiness. Mamsa dhatu and medo dhatu-If disturbed vata enters mamsa and medo dhatu creates tumours which are very pain- ful, hard and rough, giddiness, heaviness in the body, severe pain, stiffness and patient feels as if beaten by fist or baton. Asthi dhatu-\f disturbed vata enters asthidhatu causes pain in the thighs, joints & bones, loss of strength. Majja dhatu-If disturbed vata enters majja dhatu causes hollowness in bones, loss of sleep and.intermittent pain. © Sukra dhatu-If disturbed vata enters sukra causes prema- ture ejaculation, non elimination and abnormalities in the sukra. i.e. deformities in the embryo. Indriya— If disturbed vara enters sensory organs leading to loss of sensory functions. ig ee
220 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana Sira-If disturbed vata enters the sira causes dilatation or emptiness. Snayu-If disturbed vata enters the snayu causes sciatica, tetarus, hunch back. Sandhi-\f disturbed v@ta enters the sandhi causes swell- ing, which resembes like water filled bag on palpation and pain- ful in extending and flexing. Sarva Sarira~-If disturbed vata \ocalises all over the body produces pain like that of pricking, cutting, throbbing and break- ‘ing, stiffness, convulsion, loss of tactile sensation, contractions of the joints & tremors. anges fra dtrst TT (Dhatustha Pitta Dosaja Roga) Disturbed pitta if enters dhatus creates abnormalities in the dhatus are as follows— ft waft fier galfgemteanaften: 1 gina ot wpe yenfar i atest HaqEeer enftritssatsraemn: 11 A.S.Su. 19/16-19 Rasa dhatu-If disturbed pitta enters the skin i.e. rasa causes visphota (small pox) and masuriké (chicken pox). Rakta dhatu-\f disturbed pitta enters the raktadhatu pro- duces visarpa (herpes infections) and daha (burning sensation). Mamsa dhatu-If disturbed pitta enters the mamsa dhatu causes ulcers and putrification. Medo dhatu-If disturbed pitta enters the medo dhatu causes burning sensation, tumours, excessive perspiration and thirst. Upadrava 221 Asthi dhatu-If disturbed pitta enters asthi dhatu causes yellow discolouration of eyes and nails. Sukra dhétu-If disturbed pitta enters the Sukra dhatu pro- duces bad smell and yellowish discolouration. Sira-If disturbed pitta enters the sira produces anger and irrelevant speach. Snayu-If disturbed pitta enters the snayu produces thirst. Kostha-If disturbed pitta enters the kostha causes toxic- ity, thirst, burning sensation & many other symptoms. AGA HH aast Wt (Dhatustha Kapha Dosaja Roga) 3. Disturbed kapha if enters the dhdtus causes following abnormalities. veer wate fra: Hal eres Aarau | angama yitforrt areeeitssareit: 11 abeatateanennaat atria | Ran: eye Agent wreeranfeem: 11 ASM: Yaad YHA: Wr TN! feat tid ufa frre: wena wig: aPayprdt ater warts 1 anttrarfarret ao atetive Bue Wary | A. S. Su. 19/20-24 Rasa dhatu or tvak-If disturbed kapha enters the skin causes stiffness and whitish discolouration. Rakta dhatu-If disturbed kapha enters the rakta dhatu causes anaemia. Mamsa dhatu-lf disturbed kapha enters the mamsa dhatu causes malignant tumours, scrofula, patient feels as though body is covered with raw hide and feeling of heaviness. Meda dhatu-If disturbed kapha enters medodhatu causes obesity & diabetes mellitus.
222 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Asthi dhatu-lf disturbed kapha enters the asthi dhatu causes loss of movement. Majja dhatu-lf disturbed kapha enters the majja dhatu produces whitish discolouration in the eyes. Sukra dhatu-If disturbed kapha enters Sukra dhatu causes more accumulation of Sukra due to obstruction for its outflow, it becomes thick. Sira-If disturbed kapha enters the sira causes stiffness in the body. Snayu—If disturbed kapha enters the sndyu causes pain in the joints. Kostha-If disturbed kapha enters kostha causes enlarge- ment of abdomen, anorexia, indigestion and many such abnor- malities arises out of kapha. Effects of Dosic Vitiation in the Body art ger wal, qaqa Aer ag 2 earia wit waa ai wen Hera weft Fert Ter: 11 A. S. Su 19/14-15 Disturbed dosas while circulating in the body brings vitia- tion in the dhatus, both combined together create abnormalities in the channels; which are two below (rectum and urethra), seven in the head (two in the eyes, two in the ears, two in the nose, © mouth) and channels carrying sweat. Diseases manifest inside the body is a combined effect of the above. ad Wh (Dhatupaka) a ON Uhl VA:, SIM Y AeaTH:; Barn Past ee wes faeent vivarefe | orcireieterayea argat ore aaory 1 M.Ni. 2/66-73 (Madhukosa) Upadrava 223 Dhatupaka and malapaka (dosa paka) are two different process responsible for the prognosis of diseases. Dhétupaka means worsening of the disease condition due to its advance stage along with loss of strength and elimination of dhatus via miutradi excreta. Symptoms e Loss of sleep. e Stiffness in cardiac region e Constipation e Heaviness e Anorexia @ Malaise e Loss of strength Dhatupaka causes damage to cells and tissues. That’s why this stage is considered as a serious stage in the progress of pathogenesis of diseases. Dhatus doesn't perform their normal functions as a result variation observed in normal values of dhatu, wa-sinfarn Newly majifested disease is called nava and this condition is called nava avastha. As the disease persists for many days is called jirnadvastha, it may varies from disease to disease. Saeay Bea sat siuigade | C.Ci 3/291 Jirnavastha stage develops when weakness develops in dhatus. Deficient dhatus fails to perform their normal protec- tive functions leading to chronicity of the disease. SAM Ws Wet (Uithana and Gambhira Stage) These are the stages of disease indicating superficial or deeper nature of pathogenesis. In utthana avastha only the su- perficial dhatus are involved. In gambhira avastha, ‘umikngren gfa weit asmeng sae: | : C.Su 28/7 (Cakrapani) Deeper dhatus upto majjadhatu are involved in the’
224 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana samprapti. Sugruta said that this stage is called avagadha avastha. : . HT, Stages occuring due to Sroto Vaisamya. i) Ajatodakavastha, Picchavastha and Jatodakavastha are the progressive conditions of srotorodha in udara roga. ii) Antarvegi and Bahirvegi Avastha : Under jvaradhikara these two conditions described. Antarvegi avastha suggests greater srotorodha and dosadusti. Antarvegi Avastha ; In this condition symptoms of vitia- tion of pitta and vata are prominent. arraleisfiepegem we: yard wa: | wraftayerraal ae af fare: 11 Cc. Ci 3/39-40 Patient feels internal burning sensation even if the external body temperature is not increased, excessive thirst, delirium, severe pain in bones and joints, obstruction to the excretion. It may be due toxaemia of metabolic or microbial fevers. Bahirvega Avastha Banas wanfiany arenes a ara afeira fern wqerenata a 11 C. Ci 3/41 Patient feels burning sensation superficially but not inside the body. Symptoms like thirst, delirium etc. starts diminishing and disease become easily curable. IV. Stages occuring due to change in the condition of Ama and Agni. These two factors are interdependent and should be con- sider together. The change in the constitution of G@ma manifest due to enhanced power of agni converts the primary stage i.e. - Gmavastha to pacyamanavasthé and pakvavastha. Digestion of Gma depends on the nature of agni, when the power of agni gets increased either by treatment or by natural process the di- gestion of dma begins and this condition is called Upadrava 225 pacyamanavastha. When the digestion of dma is completed, then it is called pakvdvastha or niramavastha. amgpennft we farcanft (Asukari and Cirakari) Sudden onset and short duration of the disease condition is called @Sukdri or acute stage of the disease. Certain diseases like vatavyadhi, uraksata etc. manifests insidiously. Cirakari ferfeora sft 22 farerenaees Haye, HSAs AeA: | C.Su 28/7 (Cakrapani) Persistence of the symptoms for longer period of time is called cirakari. These diseases are difficult to cure because they are deep seated and gives displeasure and disease becomes in- curable. That’s why our dcaryds said that if disease become one year old it becomes incurable. For example: Kustha, Jirna Jvara, Paksaghata, Prameha etc. Importance of the knowledge of Avasthas i) Certain symptoms are specific for a specific disease, i.e. they are not dependent on the stage of the disease or vyadhi avasthG. For example svedavarodha, santapa etc. are specific symptoms of jvara vyadhi. But other symptoms are either de- pendent on dosadusti of vyddhiavastha. It is essential ‘to differ- entiate the symptoms occurring due to dosadusti from that due to vyddhiavastha, to arrive at a correct diagnosis. The descrip- tions of Gmavastha and kaphaja vyadhi, so are the descriptions of pacyamandvastha and pittajavyadhi, given in the Samhitas closely resembles each other. In such cases, if the. physician is not experienced enough to understand the changes in the symp- toms occurring due to vyddhivastha he may not be able to dis- tinguish between the two conditions. For example gurugdatrata, praseka, hrllasa and tandra are the symptoms common in the
226 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana the .samavastha of jvara and kaphaja jvara. But symptoms like apakti, ksudhamandya, bahumutrata are the specific symptoms of the samdvastha of Jvara. ii) Lf treatment is given after a comprehensive understandng of the stage of dosa (vrddhi, sthana or ksaya); the condition of the body and agni, the mental state and the vyadhiavastha, vaidya will attain four fold success. The treatment must change according to the change in vyddhivastha; For example langhana is recommended in navajvara while ghrtapdna is advised for jirna jvara. stambhana is the treatment in atisdra, but it is not recommended in its amavastha. Hence lack of knowledge of the dvasthds may lead to a wrong treatment or ‘‘aSuddha cikitsa’’. Such treat- ment produces several ‘upadrava’ or complications. 3) Peer warrenty | Wyo a fare Het cterte Y wea | Wah dearer Head | Ka@Syapa says that if medicine and pathya are administerated at the improper avastha, i.e. without knowing the specific avasthakala, they produce greater vitiation of dosas. Hence the value and efficacy of treatment depend on a compre- hensive and minute knowledge of various avasthas. The same used in suitable conditions produce the effects like nectar. Khi, 2/8-9 4) A proper knowledge of the avastha is helpful in pre- venting the development of a more severe stage of the disease. For example, hrdroga (myocardial infarction), if this stage is treated properly it will be possible to prevent the occurrence of Hrdroga proper. 5) A knowledge of the avastha is also helpful in determin- ing the sadhyasadhyarva of the disease. For example, Antarvegi avastha indicates kastasadhyatva, while bahirvegi avastha sug- gests sukhasGdhyatva. The benign type of arbuda is sukhasadhya while the malignant type is asadhya. Dhatu- Upadrava_ 227 gatavasthé in deeper dhatus \ike asthi, majja and Sukra indi- cates morbidity of the disease. @ 6) Nava and jirnavastha of the disease indicates its prognosis for example if the disease is newly manifested it is said to be curable condition in most of the diseases. But once the disease becomes chronic it indicates its difficult nature in the management.
Chapter 12 HS Welle (Asta Mahdagada) The eight cripple and fatal diseases are said ‘to be great diseases because of their incurable nature. ick : f on , A.S.Su 9/21 Adoptation of incompatible dietetic regimen leads to de- velopment of fatal disorders, which kills the person like poi- son. ATCT TGA TTT: 1 aif «oveuiterst neRPT: «ARR 1 AS.Su 9/21 Vatavyadhi, asmari, kustha, meha, udara roga, bhagan- dara, arga and grahani are considered as mahadroga (dreadful disease), due to their incurable nature. arent: wera peat wren arent yaurige AAAS | weet waeta gfraferen wert: s.su 33/4-5 Vatavyadhi, prameha, kustha, arsa, bhagandara, asmari, mudha garbha, udara roga are the eight major killer disorders since from their inception and these diseases are difficult to cure or incurable diseases. Wetter shor AUTRES ASAT S.Su 33/4-5 (Dalhana) Mahdagada means which is dreadful, incurable one and ma- . jor disease in terms of its severe morbidity. arrearkreamt Get yitet agdtet | Tet a gtd a wre a at at 1 arate fraty a free uftactiq CI 9/8-9 Asta Mahagada 229 Vatavyadhi, apasmara, kustha, Sopha, udara, .gulma, madhumeha, rajayaksma are the eight major diseases. These are said to be incurable because these diseases reduces strength and muscles, that’s why it should be discarded for management. arena pet wcaltget ati aed at a an aftenq freniswashrasiag) A.S.8@ 11/35 Vatavyadhi, apasmara, kustha, rakta pitta, udara roga, ksaya, gulma, meha are eight cripple major disorders should be rejected’ for the treatment. If the patient is weak or emaciated with little abnormalities is also said to be refusal for treatment. [is [ite Tee 188 [| reat erro [amen Other than eight cripple or dreadful disorders incurable diseases may also be included under mahdgada. MUTA: vieeqenrasesaceray sritareyet yest a fecra yaroetaa a | Urea watta ferashaq! — S.Su 33/5-6 Diseases should be discarded by the physician if follow- ing complications arise in patients. e Diminution of strength and muscle Consumption, thirst, vomiting, fever, diarrhoea, faint- ing, hiccough, dyspnoea.
230 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana ardeantel (Vata Vyadhi) Tet Fer ATSHTACA THAT RATTNT BATE ! M.Ni 22/1-4 (Madhukosa) Person who is suffering from vatavyadhi is considered as mahdagada because vata is powerful and capable of manifest- ing acute insidious diseases. Number of vatavyadhis are more in comparison to pitta and kaphaja vikara. These vatavyadhis are difficult to cure or incurable, needs emergency treatment, specific line of treatment is essential to come out of complica- tions. at wana araentafarsraa 1 S.Su. 33/7 Vata vyadhi (diseases of the nervous System and connec- tive tissue) kills the patient when accompanied with complica- tions such as oedema, numbness, fractures, tremors, flatulence and deep seated pain. STANT (Apasmara) vataderetiegnrargsy uftasit | omen git aimenitsa entire sui. 61/3 Smrti means rememberance of past objects and knowledge of nature of things are lost is called apasmara and which is going to kill the person. wevtsverst gy vaftei afermrge Tanai a fagaioemert fara 1 S.Su. 33/26 Apasmara (epilepsy) kills the patient who faints very fre- quently, too much emaciation, has unsteady brows and makes abnormal movements of the eyeballs. . Asta Mahagada 231 Hs (Kustha) frat afe ea omafast | eft aa: set wh aa es vain Tena: whereas vedt franz sted «ofafeerit occas | tae wea qe wey: a quar xfargqads S.Ni 5/31-32 If kustha rogi dies and if he is reborn again, kustha fol- lows him. That’s why this disease is said to be troublesome dis- ease in comparison to other diseases. One who strictly follows the foods and activities as per advise of physician and undergo spe- cial therapeutic procedures and consume special medications and resort to penances such individuals attain blissful life. Wig = @ Tet ATL wsahprid ws wie gtr S.Su, 33/9 Kustha (dermatological disorders including leprosy) kills the patient when having complications such as tearing or split- ting of the body parts, exudation, red coloured eyes, loss of voice and patient will not respond to paiica karma or disease become converted to dhatugata stage. THT (Raktapitta) were Teenafiqaaastern tt a Paerwraheart THA FURR | C.Ci 4/5 Raktapitta is a serious or fatal disease and afflicts the Pa tient with a great speed like fire and also manifest instanta- neously. That’s why immediate or emergency treatment is ad- vocated to treat raktapitia.
232 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfina & Roga Vijfiana Tart a fast get waftrt faavaft i S.Su. 33/24 Rakta pitta (bleeding disorders) kills the patient who’ has vomitting of blood frequently, red coloured eyes and sees the spaces around as red in*colour. Ser TH (Udara Roga) ; C.Ci 13/5-6 ; Patient who is suffering from udara roga leads a miserable life and suffers from dryness of mouth, emaciation of body, dis- tension of abdomen and pelvis, lack of power of appetite and di- gestion, unable to do any kinds of work, seen as helpless indi- vidual and craves for effective remedy and they are breathing their last like an orphan. That’s why it is considered as mahagada. fate yim «7 asiagentday 1 S.Su. 33/14 A patient of udara (abdominal disorders) should be re- fused when associated with complications such as breaking pain in the flanks, aversion to food, oedema, diarrhoea, abdomen . Setting filled (with fluid) again even after purgation. Yee (Gulma) Ueda «= fasterange: «= geafiz-eftaa | . S.Utt. 42/5-6 Guilma arises due to aggravated vata as prime factor and it Asta Mahagada 233 arises from deep place inside mahdsroatas and is broad like gulma (shrub) is called gulma. a were wt merci age: | at: wet weed a UeEyTaned: | S.Utt. 42/6-7 A mass present in between heart and urinary bladder in- creases its size on its own like the bubble in water and moves inside the mahdsrotas, it does not undergo suppration and ulceration. That’s why it becomes difficult for manage- ment. aTasyerfucrarateasa ranean: 1 vata gdet a afer yepter: 11 S.Su. 33/21 Gulma (abdominal tumor) kills the patient when accompained with dyspnoea, pain in the abdomen, severe thirst, aversion to food, absence of movement of the tumor or cystic hardness and debility. AAC (Madhumeha) C.Ni 6/27 All varieties of prameha, if not treated at the appropriate time, get converted to madhumeha and this disease is incur- able. : ara: waa wate a1 a area see: 7B fe ssa | A aie afar qert fear waa dives wearer C.Ci 6/57 Patients who are suffering from prameha since from the time of birth and those who are born from madhumeha parents are said to incurable due to the morbidity in their genes. He- reditary diseases are said to be incurable. 17Vik. & Roga
234 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiidna aarmasenfasniraarra aI fasanfafsa me waet eet anal S.Su. 33/8 Prameha (urological disorders including diabetes mellitus) kills the person when associated with complications or with excessive urination and profused appearance of eruptions. USHA (Rajayaksma) sepa ARTE: | gaat 9 grat: «pists eanféegracr: | femqancarst «= aa eea Wt S.Utt. 41/3-4 The disease rajayaksma is followed by many diseases, which precedes many diseases, difficult to understand and dif- ficult to cure and which is powerful. It is also called Sosa be- cause it dries up rasdadhi dhdtus. It is also called ksaya because it causes loss of functions. Some people say it as rajayaksma because this disease affected the king moon. qemanaerepearaaraisey 1 ren ag tet gem wie waraqi S.Su. 33/20 ‘Rajayakgma@ (pulmonary tuberculosis) kills the patient when accompained with white coloured eyes (bright/lusterous eyes), aversion to food, prominent expiration and frequent n micturations. aret oe potverqeteteregmety Senter garrett nN S.Su. 33/10 Arsas (hemorrhoids) kills the patient when accompained ’ with thirst, anorexia, abdominal pain, copious ‘bleeding, oedema and ciarrhoea. Asta Mahagada 235 Wr (Bhugandara) armayiint «= fara: | aa wre sweats wer a aftastay S.Su. 3/11 Bhagandara (fistula-in-ano) should be refused when flatus, urine, faeces, worms and semen are seen coming out througn the fistula. S.Su. 33/12. ASmari (urolithiasis) kills the patient soon when accompained ; with profound swelling of the umbilicus and scrotum, retention of urine, severe pain and elimination of urinary gravel. youd (Midha Garbha) udaiteatrag) — afreatt: 1 eam fat yqent usimmgura: 11 S.Su. 33/13 Miudha garbha (obstructed foetus) kills the patient when accompained with obstruction in uterus, post-partum pain, vagi- nal constriction and other complications in confounded foetus. Sat (Jvara) wera fade ve frofadtst ar vintiisareors satu frat At: 1) at get cnt ee dey | fret aesor degen sett Bhat Aa II frearmatread gé. fayette
236 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana S.Su. 33/15-18 Jvara (fever) kills the patient who faints often, becomes un- conscious while lying: or falling down, suffers from cold exter- nally and heat internally; he who has frequent horripilations, red- dish eyes, pain in the heart as though hit by stone, constantly in- spires by mouth he who is suffering from hiccups, dyspnoea, se- vere thirst, unconsciousness, unsteady look, constant expirations and debility; he whose eyes are turbid (dirty), who faints often, having very deep sleep, and diminution of blood and muscles. STAM (Atisara) aTreyyertirarend afiat vearoifsay 1 faster oat = gander ferme S.Su. 33/19 Atisdra (diarrhoea) kills the patient when associated with dyspnoea, pain in the abdomen, severe thirst, emaciation, fever and is particularly the old men. faafét (Vidradhi) SaTareeanas oideargsradd fastiatertay 11 S.Su. 33/22 Vidradhi (abscess) kills theazatient when having symptoms such as distention (of the abscess), obstruction to flow of exu- dations (blood, pus etc.), vomiting, hiccup, thirst, pain and dyspnoea. UTS UhT (Panduroga) Unger! «as uMgtas «oo: | cugradet a meg feavaft i S.Su. 35/23 Asta Mahagada 237 ‘The patient of panduroga (anaemia) perishes when accompained with whitish yellow colouration of the teeth, nails and eyes and sees all things as yellowish white in colour. SATE (Unmada) wep a atoritaacit At 1 BrMaTE yer feavafa 11 S.Su. 33/25 Unmada (insanity) kills the patient who keeps. his face al- ways either looking up or looking down, has loss of muscles and strength and is awake always. STAMPA (Atatvabhinivesa) wat Herre sf anicafatrasr: 1 . C.Su. 19/8 Atatvabhinivesa is considered as mahdgada by Caraka.
Chapter 13 ars fated ee (Asta Nindita Purusa) atageara, aficinnea, ae a, sitenza, africa, aire afrayrgatt 1 C.Su 21/03 Asta nindita refers to one who is despicable in relation to principles of treatment. Out of eight Caraka explained only two i.e. sthaulya and krsa indetail. It ma¥ be due to wide variation of treatment principles in these individuals. In case of other remaining six, there may not be much antagonistic to general principle of treatment. areal faery feanfastsergery 1 car arafadtatdtar your ater | franfagris argreamfatiraacanry aq wut as TEaAT | C.Su. 21/2(Ganhgadhara) Nindita word here refers to person who is not suitable for general principle of treatment. Atidtrgha (tall) person may be handsome and beautiful in terms of look, but he is not appro- priate person for.general principles of treatment. That’s why it is included under asfanindita. “1. sfaetd (Aridirgha)—Too tall aes (Atihrsva)—Too short atfeeitar (Ati loma)—Over hairy Ste (Aloma)—Hairless SHAH (Ati krsna)—Too black RC iuice (Ati gaura)—Too fair afar (Ati sthila)—Over obese SPAHR (Ati kréa)—Over emaciation. Gangadhara included 3 more i.e. SOAK WA WN A Asta Nindita Purusa 239 Beet: | C.Su 21/02 (Gangadhara) 9. Het (Kubja)— Hump backed 10. MT (Kana) — One eyed a V1. ih (Bhahgura) — Crooked o-bent_ aThereet (Atisth iila) Causative Factors aaferuteafaerqrungergt sitafereteeitrecararn- ETAT ATCA Y TAT, feridisramaradtasiad | ee C.Su 21/4 x Over saturation ot: excessive intake of food Intake of heavy, sweet, cold and fatty diet Lack of physical exercises Abstinence from sexual intercourse Sleeping during day time Exhilaration or excessive cheerfulness Lack of mental exercise Genetic defect or hereditary one BTEC VAT (Eight fold abmormalities of obese person) — dpieai arate: ee eee eas C.Su 21/4 ue Shortening. of life span Deranged movement or sluggish movement Difficulty in sexual] intercourse General debility Foul smell from the body Excessive sweating Increased appetite Excessive thirst
240 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijftina & Roga Vijiiina 7 Pathogenesis of Eight Fold Dosas of Sthiila Person . amragat era: ‘[(Ayuso Hrasah) — Diminution of longevity] wer olrtehert Ae wataeitat 4 astat aaa: TETAS era: C.Su 21/4 Except medadhdaty other-dhatus do not grow uniformly, as a result of which longevity diminishes. arate: [(Javoparodhah) — Deranged movement] _ Pawan taarateyerdter Haat Tala: 1 Su 21/4 SInggish or deranged movements is due to looseness, ten- derness and heaviness of meda. HSTTAMT (Difficulty in sexual intercourse). Qragarces sqaateares HAIG 1 C.Su 21/4 Difficulty in sexual intercourse is due to inadequate se- men along with obstruction to its normal path by meda. ahiet (General debility) SteleerrareTEnat t C.Su 21/4 General debility is due to inadequate dhatus. - aniza (Foul smell from the body) ahied Adderten: wavy Were) CS 21/4 Foui smell from the body is due to inherent defect i in medas and general nature of meda followed by excessive salivation." aera: (Excessive perspiration) Aga: yeonteMifigea Partagas Te eaE Tar OTeT: : C.Su 21/4 When meda is associated with kapha, which is fluid, mul- titudinous and heavy and it cannot withstand physical exercise leading to excessive sweating. Asta Nindita Purusa : 241 gata (Excessive appetite) & fraranftt aet (Excessive thirst) (C.Su 21/4) Excessive appetite and thirst is due to enhanced digestive fire along with excess presence of vata in kostha. Pathophysiology of Obesity Remssgaanicrarg: mrs fagtva: | ay agqaratronent siraaeata 1 weary a vith ween arate freanivasya dry aifiseceafremz | Tequaaentt fastrrafaarect | wit fe aa: wet art at aes aaenita wae Redentrena: | reer, ere Get saree FHT | Adhiaftasaredeftaryarerst: araalaeriienet «= TS fereqet = gla aefteat a gaat waa a frfés C.Su 21/5-10 Due to excessive accumulation of meda in the body vata gets obstruction to its normal movement ‘as a result vata is spe- cially confined to kostha leading to stimulation of digestive power and obsorption of the food. Digestion of consumed food become very fast due to enhanced agni, that’s why person eats more and more amount of food. In case of delay in taking food he is afflicted with some serious disorders because it digest the dhatus. The'agni and vata are the two most trouble some and complicating and burns the obese individual like the forest fire burning forest. In the event of excessive increase of fat, vata etc. which’ may lead to development of severe disorders and destroy the life of an individual instantaneously.
242 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Diagnosis of Over Obese e Excessive increase of meda, mamsa e Buttocks, abdomen and breast become pendulous e@ There will be disproportionate in strength in compari- son to physical growth aifgret (Acikréa)—(Over emaciation) aa | eae OT PTET fea: vitevt = anfatfafme: | PACA eA: wanfaskt | fang: we: gear ATL! C.Su 21/10-12 Causative factors e Excessive consumption of rough foods and drinks e Fasting e Less intake of food e Excessive exposure to purificatory therapies “ @ Grief e Suppression of natural urges including the urge for sleep ‘e Distrubed sleep e Application of non unctuous substances in excess e Excessive indulgence in bath e By birth due to genes e Old age : e Suffering from chronic disorder e Anger Atikrséa person does not tolerate eararaahereeedt aftaararrateeny | am 3 wed mateo i C.Su 21/13 t e Physical exercise e Over saturation or excess consumption of food ” Asta Nindita Purusa 243 Hunger, thirst Diseases Moderate and powerful drugs Excessive cold and heat Sexual intercourse The following diseases manifest in atikrsa individual velar wre: ata: yore Yeats vieqaufir & | ws oweasfwerafa timer aecihre: | C.Su 21/14 e Plihad roga e Kasa e Ksaya e Svasa © Gulma © Arsa e Udara roga e Grahani dosa Prominent features. of atikréa individual are yenfenetitar quisiera: | vanftasidisteps: weal at Fa: | C.Su 21/15 °° e Wasting prominently marked in buttocks, abdomen and neck e Prominent vascular net work in the body e@ Remnants of skin and bone © Joints are prominently seen Importance of understanding astanindita Eight despicable are considered as undesirable because they do not possesses sufficient resistive power against dise- ases. e The qualitative and quantitative proportion of the dhatus are not uniform. : e The anguli pramana-and sarnhanana of the ahdtu are abnormal ; - ‘© Vitiation of rakta, mamsa and asthi e It may be due to abnornial hormonal activities
244 ' Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana aa carftraraeratereyera yt ae aad aeeref of merece | wicaard at ang aiiuecct fe dh wat oninerstqy eye Farferisay 1 . C.Su 21/16-17 The over obese person and over emaciated person suffer from some diseases and these diseases are to be treated by bulk reducing and nourishing therapies respectively. Out of two, emaciation is better for management in comparison to over obese Person even though both of them are equally in neéd of treat- ment. Over obese person suffers from more diseases in | camparison to emaciated individual. The problem with over obese person is that if they managed with nourishing treatment, they become more obese, they cannot withstand bulk reducing therapy because of their Strong digestive power. On the other hand emaciated Persons responds well to nourishing ’ therapy. Chapter 14 site (Arista) Pramacureaadk fergafte 1 .Ni 1/2-3 (Madhukosa) Appeared symptoms which indicate the definite death of the patient is called arista. Welter Werepregqar aT | wart waa ae fi cent S.Su 28/3 By seeing flower, smoke and cloudy weather one can expect fruit, fire and rain respectively. In the same way cer- tain symptoms appear before the death of the patient is called rista. att deen warerel aden cafes Tet def yt mina ya a aut fe 1 S.Su 28/4-5 Some times ristas are not recognised by unintelligent vaidya due to their minuteness or misunderstanding or by carelessness because arista develops instanteneously before the death of an individual. Once the symptoms developed death is certain. war ferafteret =o geet sera: 1 CI 2/3 Flower indicates the forthcoming fruit. In the same man- ner appearance of particular symptoms anticipate imminent death of the patient. ge a gear | 7 cafteea cree argits fea aonet aot aft aah sariteq: ae | CI 2/4-5
246 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Some flowers may not followed by a fruit. Sometimes fruit may be seen without flower. But once symptoms appear indica- tive of arista, death is certain. Death may not be there in the absence of arista. ake wit uct gefte ui sifaaqs afte feat a a. feeseriqura: CU. 5/2 Without arista death is not certain and person will die after its appearance. Unskilled and improperly trained physician fails to identify the features of imminent \déath, aera aroretaront | ds Su par. 3 (Dathana) Arista indicates the definite death of: the ‘patient. farraeaferad: saci senna: | fre gdta agree freeatir c11728 The signs produced by the vitiated dosas which have tran- scended the sphere of treatment and pervaded all over the body are known as arista. RETA (Ristabhasa) Sarena aEraSraT: APRA | A.Hr.8a 5/3 Greatly excacerbated dosds manifest powerful symptoms resembling that of arista but they are not ar*cta is called ristabhasa and these subside by pacifying dosdas. _ Resa: (Ristabhava) © SOPRATESTAT viceoranterartag | went oa aay | wradeafafinn: | fapitat ware fe afeft mari A.Hr.S& 5/4-5 Certain factors like rupa (appearance, size, shape, colour | etc.), Indriya (sense organs), svara (voice), chaya (complextion), Arista 247 Pratichaya (image), kriya (functions) etc. change their normal functions and become abnormal without any apparent cause is known as arista. I. Arista Purusamanasrta Purusa samsrayani © Dutadhikaragamya arista @ Svapnagamya arista etc. Prakrti Vikrti Jati prasakta Laksana nimitta Kula prasakta Laksya nimitta DeSanupatini Nimittanurupa Kalanupatini Vaya anupatini Pratyatma niyata II. Arista Niyata arista Sthayi Asthayi
248 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiana afte Az (Classification of Arista) arabia, + waed ao arf adeata; gerade gafahitrsmitearerang | S.Su 28/2-3 (Dalhana) _ Dathana classifiéd arista into two kinds namely niyata and ' aniyata. Niyata means definite event leading to death. For ex- ample smoke leads to fire, it is niyata arista. Aniyata yvefers to indefinite event about the future event leading to death. For example flower and cloud are indefinite because it may not end in fruit and rain always. Arista produced by messenger, omens are also indefinite signs of death. Were | A.H.S& 5/3-4 Rista is of two varieties i.e. sthayi (permanent) and asthayi (temporary). Asthayi rista is temporary manifestation develops due to excessively excacerbated dosds and subside by mitigat- ' ing dosds. Sthayi arigta indicates definite death of the patient. we q eat wtteannt aniad gerrntreanh, ahr ger wernfit 1 aa ait Gerninants argued grave ata, qeadsentin ga: wafadt faafave | _ CIi/4 It is of two kinds namely purusamanagrta and purusa samSrayani. Purusamanasrta are not related to the patients and are to be understood by authoritative statements and rational thinking. Purusasamraydni are observed in patient and can be ascertained by normal constitution and morbid dispositions. wa wephraikoren &, SoH 4B, Seat as, wena 4, Risgakeia, senate at t sikigererencaa: weer fe dat at qearot & a srafasrer sata | CL I/S Normal consitution is of six categories depending upon its distinctive features— Arista 249 _ . Jati (caste)-e.g. purity among Brahmanas 2. Kula (family)-e.g. purity in character and conduct 3. Desa (place)—e.g. purity observed among people of antarvedi region. 4. Kala (time)~e.g. purity observed in satyayuga. 5. Vaya (age)~e-g. impurity observed in childhood. 6. Pratyaétma niyata (individuality)-e.g. purity rarely observed in some individuals. ; Fait (Vikrsi) Morbid dispositions is subdivided into three subtypes namely. frafa: pretence Birr a, Arye a Cl 1/6 e Laksana nimitta (Bodily marks) e Laksya nimitta (Etiological factors) e Nimittaénurupa (Resemble the etiological factors) aan ffir (Laksana nimitta) _ aa cement art at wer: eet cermata egy CI 1/6 (1) Laksananimitta manifest due to past deeds and develops certain bodily marks which indicates morbid conditions. Such conditions e.g. attainment of empire, wealth, assasination, im- prisonment etc. are no doubt indicated by bodily marks like the sign of lotus etc. Certain bodily marks are fixed in some body parts and develop as a morbid condition in favourable times in certain situations. So these bodily marks are considered as caus- ative factors for such morbid conditions in a secondary sense. meataftrn (Laksya nimitta) matin ¢ ot sear sauces Pf aie erry (CI 1/6 (2) 18 Vik. & Roga
swe 250 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijfiana Morbid conditions caused by etiological factors is de- scribed in Nidana, Sutra and Cikitsdsthdna etc. is known as : laksya nimitta. For example : © Etiological factors described for each and every disease e@ Etiological factors for aggravation of dosa, dhatu etc. described FRRaypeM (Wimittanurupa) irae 7 froatqentont a, amfftrat frag: WaT wa ehord frst yayergs: wabfind tafersrzeui, Teanga sania aershqateghs aia enter yearsranfot Waa venmipyqataas: | Se: 1 C117 These are not etiological factors in real sense but resemble them in effects. It is known as nimittanurupa. This will serve as a yard stick to measure the span of life. Particularly the signs of imminent death as a result of the diminution of the span of life. That’s why more stress has been given to this. It is the duty of the physician to. have a thorough knowledge of this to ascertain the span of life of an individual otherwise it becomes very dif- ficult phenomenon. Such descriptions are widely described in Caraka Indriyasthana, The following factors must be taken into consideration by the physician desirous of ascertaining remaining span of life by pratyaksa (direct observation), anumdna (inference) and upadesa (scriptual testimony or authoritative statements) are as follows. CI 1/3 1. aof (Varna)—Complexion . C& (Svara)—Voice WH (Gandha)-Smell WH (Rasa)-Taste . Bet (Sparsa)—-Touch . AY (Caksu)—Visual organ . StF (Srotra)-Auditory organ Arista . Ht (Ghranam)—Olfactory organ . a4 (Rasana)-Gustatory organ 10. 11. 12. 13. 14, 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. wast (Sparsana)—Tactile organ eat (Satva)-Mind aft (Bhakti)—Inclination iti (Saucam)—Purity Rte (Silam)-Conduct 3a (Acdra)—-Redefined behaviour eat (Smrti)-Memory aiepfa (Akyti)-Shape . watt (Prakrti)-Normalcy feral (Vikrti)-Morbidity © ae (Bala)-Strength tetfa (Glani)-Exhaustion Rar (Medha)-Intelligence ea (Harsa)—Exhilaration wer (Rauksya)—Roughness ee (Sneha)—Unctousness Ws (Tandra)—Drowsiness aR (Arambha)—Onset Thea (Gaurava)—Heaviness (severe) wad (Laghava)-Lightness (mild) WT (Guna)—Attributes or qualities BRK (Ahdra)-Diet fa (Vihara)—Activities sien ufo (Ahara parinama)—Digestion of food sara (Upaya)—Management STU (Apadya)—Disappearance of disease cane. (Vyadhi)—Characteristic feature of the disease 251
252 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana 37, ore qaeq (Vyadhi pirvarupa)—Prodromal symptoms of : the disease : 38. Gat (Vedand)-Pain 39. SURG (Upadrava)—Complication 40. OT (Chaya)—Lustre 41. after (Praticchdya)-Shadow 42. ractasta (Svapnadarsana)—Dreams 43. qaftar (Diutadhikara)—Messenger 44. uf dlanfan (Pathi cautpatikam)—Bad omens seen by the physician on his way: to patient house 45. SIGEe WeTAITT (Aturakule bhavavasthantarani)-Bad omens observed in patient residence 46. dua data (Bhesaja samvrtti)-Administration of proper therapy 47. tasferangten (Bhesaja vikara yukti)~Observation of effect of medicine in patient aat (Complexion)-Indicating Arista C.I 1/10 Change in body complexion i.e. half of the body may have natural complexion and other half may have abnormal com- plexion, which has been clearly demarcated. , Appearance of natural and unnatural complexions may si- multaneously appear in face and other parts of body. Other factors related to Varna (Complextion) indicat- ing Arista. C.J 1/12-14 Appearance of either piplu (port wine mark), vyanga (freck- les), tilakalaka (black mole) and pidaka (pimples) in the face of the patient. ’ Observation of change in colour i.e. blue, grey, coppery, green, white in nails, eyes, face, urine, stool, hands, legs and ‘lips along with diminution of Strength, complexion and sen- ‘sory perception. ; Sudden and abnormal appearance of abnormal complex- ions along with general weakness without any apparent cause, Arista 253 Tet (Glani), TE (Harsa), URI (Rauksya) and FS (Sneha) indicating Arista Same as like that of complextion C.J I/II aX (Voice) indicating Arista C.I 1/1 4-15 Sudden appearance of abnormal types of voice, mixture of various voices or if voice is like that of sheep (or wild goat), feeble voice, inaudible, indistinct, choaked, hoarsenessness, poor and stammering voice. Wt (Smell) indicating Arista C.I 2/8-16 One who emits constant fragrance resembling that of vari- ous flowers like a blossomed forest with many trees and-creep- ers full of flowers is known as puspita (flowered), this indi- cates person will die within a year. Person who emits fragrance similar to that of individual flowers, pleasant or unpleasant indicates arista. If physician percieves unpleasant odours collectively or individually. Even after bath, application of fragrant unguentum and sprinkling of pleasarit odour, person emits desirable or undesir- able smells alternatively without any apparent cause. : If person emits smell] like that of urine, faeces, dead body, all are unpleasant smell. Ta (Taste) indicating Arista C.[ 2/17-22 This can be understood by inference. The taste of the hu- man being gets two types of changes before the death of an individual i.e. one is bitter taste or in the form of extreme sweet- ness. In case of bitter taste flies, lice, wasps and mosquitoes get away from the body having an abnormal taste. But in case of sweetness, flies are attracted constantly even after he has taken bath and applied cosmetics.
254 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana wast (Touch) indicating Arista C.I 3/4 The following points indicate the arista by touch. Absence of pulsation in pulsating areas Coldness in those which normally remain constantly hot Soft organs become hard Excessive roughness in soft organs Absence of organ, which generally present in particular site Dislocation or looseness of joints either downward or sides Excessive loss of muscles and blood Appearance of hardness e Excessive perspiration or its absence etc. if observed without any appreciable cause indicates arista WA (Eyes) examination indicates Arista C.1 3/6 e If respiration is too long or shallow e No pulsation observed in carotid region e Accumulation of dirty substances like sugar particles or gravels with excessive whiteness e Matting of eyelashes Eyes become excessively projected Eyes may become excessive withdrawn Too much slanting of eyes Unevenness in eyes Looseness in eyes Excessive secretions in the eyes Constantly wide open eyes Constantly closed eyes Excessive blinking and opening of eyes Perturbed, reverted, diminished or scattered vision Blindness (colour) of mongoose i.e. they view every- thing as black during day time © Blindness (colour) of pigeon i.e. they view everything black during day time @ Eyes become red like fire brand © Eyes become either black, yellow, blue, darkish brown (blackish), coppery, green, deep yellow, white eeoeeeee0e34¢se:s: Arista 255 e If hair comes out from any part of the body without any pain when pulled indicates arista e Veinous prominence over abdomen with change in - colour like darkish brown (blackish), coppery, blue, deep yel- low and white e If nails are devoid of muscles and blood and becomes black like ripe fruit of jambu e No production of sound from finger joints even when bent and pressed. shart aftes (Indriyagamya Arista) Specific features observed in sense organ of a patient indi- cating imminent death. areata wat ART ATI C.14/5 If any morbidity observed in sense organs without any apparent cause indicates definite death of the patient. aaferxerna sss (Caksurindriyagamya Arista) Characteristic features of Cuksurindriya indicating death are as follows— wityafiararttra Bet feriagaa ai wre Tongeeias mea soagtrarenfa «= areditstaeniferz: | afwarata ardterarcarg: eemafesty 1 wea Gara eee AT: feo tRofa at ager sitfaera after 1 i wer vata a: dary tarifes fateenht Ba wesc fafa ai sifaquett ii aisha waftacte atet agate Fenrt | areata afe ar qerct Fret aeifa easiest
256 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana whit Fate ASeTISTH | faq a far A4: ugaq acorpsfi 11 weeita a: unit gee | aferritat ya ai aa a fats as wargrar, a qa ast a agate | arget urea: fist amet C7 47-18 e If patient sees earth as sky and vice versa. e@ One who sees the air in the sky in a moving form and does not visualize kindled fire, . e If person sees net like appearance in a clean water. ¢ During awake if person sees ghosts, demons and such other terrifying objects. e If person observes normal coloured fire as blue, lustreless, black or white. . e One who sees rays of light without clouds or cloud or lightening when there is no such changes in the sky. ¢ If one who sees the sun or the moon like an earthen plate covered with a black cloth. © Visualisation of lunar or solar eclipse in their absence by a healthy or a. patient. e One who sees sun in night, moon in day time or smoke . when there is no fire or lustreless fire in night. Arista . 257 e If one who observes brilliant things as devoid of bril- liance or non brilliant object. as brilliant one or view the things devoid of their normal characteristics. e Seeing things as deformed, multi coloured, inaccurate ‘ numbers without any actual reason. : e If one fails to visualize the visual objects and vice versa. saniearer atftes (Sravanendriyagamya Arista) Characteristic features of Sravanendriya indicating death are as follows— BT A: AT Wer AA A Ge | wracatt ae teat ae Aet fas i daengiafa: wolf vereneeg @ sgt: 1 a osgunfe wat df afar aftasiiqit C7 419-20 . e Hearing inaudible as audible and vice versa. @ One who fails to hear the heat sound after closing the ears with fingers. aroma siftes (Ghranendriyagamya Arista) Characteristic features of ghranendriya indicating death are as follows— fariin at faemeari wreaerqary | aa am aden feet frenfaragez e@ One who percieves the smell good as-bad or vice versa. e Fails to percieve the smell at all. Tenors ates (Rasanendriyagamya Arista) ‘ Characteristic features of .rasanendriya indicating death. @ vest fasrnfa a at senfa aad: | Wau wed aE: HT AT 1! Even in the absence of. stomatitis or any other inflamma- tory conditions in mouth if person fails to pezcieve the taste sensation or has a wrong gustatory perception indicates arista. | C. 1 4/21 C. I 4/22
258 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana weriersy ates (Sparsanendriyagamya Arista) Characteristic features of sparsanendriya indicating death. TOTS GRMN St STU | ear eat assed AAG AM CL 423 e If one who has touch sensations of cold as hot, smooth as coarse, or soft as hard and vice versa. gear afte (Pitrvarupagamya Arista) t F4 y ip dicative o h are Premonitory si ms and symptoms indic e of death a qaecnreeari frat ger I Frsnfeonf emnst feat pereey qeeuniir waifit = setkarafare a fag fare gaeitqear: i serenit a ther yearn at ae Ferart wet venti WR ya 1 Wiwteevieg semis, qareur | a Targqaeita WEAR 11 at a dad aq wieaag adit) wea anbrereea yilissrtasraa 1 afieg: wtatsti afr at aferot fee | Tart aaoTraeE sitet a fegafr 1 We: we feet eect a: wet YETI gat were silfert a farpafet 11 TARRSTTT A: UverraCaraTT | THe =| RATT REEL a: wae fgat arat a wh ure eefas Yerwagaa adet aie warfeg a aavd ystaraa ge: 11 Arista 259 am aucedt wer aeon ge wed! wa yererana HA fafa aay am a ates gddrgieaa wy i jena =| -YedtsParferery wargis art rat apettfterd: 1 eingieermasi afer, Weare afer: 1 a@ water dest wea ata wail C.15/3-16 e Person who is suffering from jvara has all the purvarupa in full form. e Excessive manifestation of premonitory symptoms and signs of any disease. If rajayaksma patients indulging in sex and gradually re- ducing weight and excessive excacerbation of pratisyaya. e If rajayaksma patient sees in his dreams as if he is dragged by dog or camel or asses towards south. : e In dream, person enjoys the company of ghosts and takes wine with them or drag by dogs leading to manifestation of dreadful fever. e In dream, if patient observes the sky as red like a cloth dyed with lac from a distance near by person prove to suffer from raktapitta (naemorrhagic disorders). e In dream, if person wearing red garlands, red apparel, whole body appear like red, laughs intermittently, dragged by a woman, this indicates person is going to suffer from raktapitta. e Excessive colicky pain, meteorism, gurgling sound in abdomen, discolouration of nails indicate the person is suffer- ing from. fatal disorder gulma. e In dream, one who sees the growth of spiky creeper in the chest, he falls a victim of dreadful disease guima. e Mild injury leading to big wound and wound does not
260 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfana & Roga Vijiiana heal indicates i : kustha. Person Is going to suffer from dreadful disease _e If person observes, in dreams, as if he is naked, anointed wa ghee, and offering oblations to flameless fire and has growth of lotus flower over his chest indicates person is going to suffer from fatal disease kustha. ; e If flies are attracted towards an individual inspite of tak- ing bath and applying unguentum, indicates that person is suf- fering from dreadful disease Prameha., TAMTT Biles (Svapnagamya Arista) ; Svapna (dreams) indicating imminent death or person is afflicting with severe diseases. , / eafiarit feagra weer agaist ait aafe o facitea cach twsaftrnrea a: 11 Wwiawecad: wt gy: uteri) Doftironersthawercts rer. wR st rat a: yuaeafirss meestara us a gat al qAaMs saa | wet ava viin eine feat a a 1 Seat aes eae: fewaena: ame: wet wore 1 ae ward: Ureentont: | : sepfat: fagfasranedr 1 | SAR ATACATMAT TST \ Uat at feat at rack Meh amen aris Arista 261 Taga at gf umemdice fear Tereraniont rey a: wfagreafr i Taare wagedigrare afar fayrqi areunaed! wat afagha aft ari Bort TEA wet teh ahr wom uo faa dticherraert | farmeaent wet arefign Fat 1 ged areun: vac whit aaffr cerry aim: der men ata wqeddil Cl 5/27-40 e Growth of bamboo, shrubs, creepers etc. over the head, where in birds hide themselves. e@ One who gets his head shaved. @ One who sorrounded by vultures, owls, dogs, crows along with demons, soul of dead persons, evil spirits, women, candala (a person born of Sudra father and brahmin mother), Dravidians and Andras. e One who get stucked in bush of bamboo, canes, cree- pers, grasses and thorny herbs or they fell down while walking. e If person fall down in such a place, where it is full of dust, over ant-hill or ashes or cremation ground or ditch. e@ One who drowns on unclean water, mud or in dark well or being carried by the stream flowing speedily. e Consumption of fatty substances, undergoing massage therapy, emesis, purgation. e Acquisition of gold, seeing quarrel or indulging in quar- rel, arrest and defeat. + e Loosing both shoes, peeling of slan out of feet, exhiliration and insult by angry fore feathers. e Falling or destruction of teeth, moon, sun, stars, the gods, lamp or eyes or cracking of a hill.
262 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana e Entrance into forest which is full of red coloured flow- . ers, the earth (abode of sinful acts), funeral pyre or entrance to cave, which is full of darkness. e Wearing red garlands, laughing loudly, moves nakedly toward south or to a dense forest along with monkey. © Person who is wearing ochre coloured cloth, with terri- fying look, naked, carrying stick, blackish discolouration with reddish eyes. e Seeing blackish discoloured women devoid of conduct with long hair, nails, breasts, devoid of cosmetics, garland and apparel. SuSruta also mentioned inauspicious dreams in Sutrasthana 29th chapter. Process of Manifestation of Dreams wiser Yeearetitiaaehate: | Sire aTeUI TAA] aet Uvafs sect 1 | Teor: «ee: TATE | gheagm. wie wa aveeaen it c. 1 5/41-42 When manovaha srotas is full of exceedingly excacerbated three dosas leading to observation of terrific dreams in critical period. If person sees various fruitful or fruitless dreams in sub conscious stage that a person is enabled by his mind which controls sense organs. Dreams Indicating Death in Different Diseases sata Yat wes aitersd q ifm 1 wre vant: «Rawat werk Aerio dart Sea afta rag worathafe: ated, af forte | yweReiaaot wefiea oreo: | Arista 263 wks deri ast wea Sng wegen: | wath fide vilfird a faavatei S. Su 29/68-71 1. Jvara rogi-If he sees dreams as if he is having friend- ship with dogs. 2. Sosa rogi-If he makes friendship with monkey 3. Unmada—Moving with demons 4. ApasmGra~Moving with ghosts 5. Meha and Atisara~Drinking water 6. Kustha—Drinking fats 7. Gulma-Sceing plants growing over his abdomen and head and suffering from headache. 8. Chardi-Consuming fried pastry 9. Svasa and pipasa—Walking long distances 10. Pandu rogi-Consuming rice boiled with haridra 11. Raktapitta—Drinking blood tat GI (Results of Various Dreams) fraracnfageedte? a ahaArl AE: WHA a: TA: Piscawet wad | a vata Gidea 8 We: TaAeHet: 11 sracanrfy <aqct Geet wa a: YA! aya dest Yeni wes faaregy HTL C. I 5/44-46 Dreams relates to visual perception, auditory perception, experiences through other means, strong desire, imagination, dreams experienced during day time, dreams which are too short or too long are fruitless dreams. Dreams experienced in the early hours of night yields less results.
264 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana If one who fails to get sleep after seeing dreams, which is highly fruitful. After experiencing inauspicious dream, if person experi- ences auspicious dream thereafter, it indicates good results. ea meq siftes (Rupa Indicating Imminent Death) wae a WARE SAE wrt oa a wad Oh fet anf a sitet 11 att a daa sit gor aifawadtt 1 wad ef yet a dt fire uftasitai) 6c. 1 6/5-6 , The following symptoms and signs indicating physical ab- ' normalities and such patients should be discarded by the physi- cian are as follows— e If patient experiences severe pain in upper part of chest while speaking. e Emitting food Indigestion inspite of retainment of food in stomach Unexplained weight loss all of a sudden Excessive thirst Pain in the heart The following symptoms indicating fatal symptoms in various diseases are as follows— feean weit ger yvifind arftraria 1 aoa aw cad wane it C.1 6/7 Gambhira hikka and raktatisara patients should not be treated. orremfers wad get ATL! eafed fagrit tet geist wer sitfermy C.1 68 If debilitated person suffers from andha and atisara, his survival is rare. Arista 265 amesmagen wz aad get ATI fart feet oom afar i C.16/9 If debilitated person suffers from a@naha and excessive tryna, he will definitely die soon. wat: Ulalfgat wer YERRTaAs SECT: | aeniatdicr «= aa. aera: i Cc. 1 6/10 One who is suffering from morning fever with severe cough and having loss of strength and muscles. He is just like ghost. wa oat qd ai afd cduadd freon weft: get a a staf | C1 6/iI Person who is suffering from dyspnea, abdominal disor- ders, lack of power of agni, passes hard stool and urine in con- densed form. wapka oferet gem fradfa: wiivag uw datya aa Wi wd C7 6/12 If person who is suffering from Svayathu, which is ini- tially confined to abdomen later spreads to hands and feet, dies with prolonged illness. meypie Geman at a fatter | areaarga wg a fae aftasaqil 9c. 1 6/13 Oedema in feet, slackness in calf muscles along with ex- treme weakness in the legs such cases should not be treated. weet eT epee ATH draviaerenieetraread, i C164 If person who is suffering from oedema in hands, feet, perineum or private parts and abdomen along’ with diminished complexiou, strength and reduced capacity to consume food. For such patients physician should not prescribe medicine. 49Vik. & Roga : -
266 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana stat agector sie: dia: aeitfea: | aad wae wer ert afta iW C165 If patient expectorates profuse sputum having blue, yel- low or red colour from the chest of a patient should be dis- carded even from distance. SeUa Braga: BE: srasafaa: | afore oat qesaf aa Wed il | C1 6/16 If patient suffers from horripilation, passes viscous urine, oedema, cough, fever along with extreme emaciation should be discarded from distance. wa: wept aca ate: aretfrerferat: | pyres aces area wea Faffarmy ty Cc. 1 6/17 If a patient is severly emaciated and weak along with ex- cessive excacerbation of three dosas leading to non treatable condition. varaant wierd sagat wat: eats qaera «faytiuy arearaa saa 1 C1 6/78 If weak person suffer from fever and diarrhoea after oedema or vice versa indicates death. wWogs ais garensfuafay: 1 sant oitdiragara: wreanesrat fast tic. 16/19 The patient who is having excessive pallor, excessive ema- ciation, excessive thirst, rigid and fixed vision, abdominal dis- tension and difficult expiration should be discarded by the phy- sician. wyrareeger aergrensfrarar 1 moni adt ma dt uaa = c. 16/20 If patient of Aanustambha and manyastambha suffers from excessive thirst, excessive reduction of strength and vital breath Arista 267 confined only to chest, such patient should be discarded. aerrresa wef a fafsrefr fect | atorabaaerentt wheat C7 6/21 If a patient gets attacks of fainting and violent movements of the body without any rest and has diminished muscles. & strength, with lack of digestive power, he will succumb to death very soon. : fase aq faesiomar yer ait geo wn: itt w wal C1 6/22 If severe diseases having mutually contradictory etiologi- cal factors and principles of treatment aggravate suddenly in a galloping speed, patient will die very soon. unit aa area fat fai a gaat C. 1 6/23 If patient develops sudden diminution of strength, intel- lect, health, digestion, muscles, blood succumb to death very soon. : amra gtat aeq wate: aida wee vem dea yeaa siferii = Cc. 7 6/24 Sudden deterioration of health and change in physical con- stitution indicates person is going to die soon. Saray ates (Chayagamya Arista) qeat ara feariieany werent aarkeary wirorarrdinaniarresteatateag, 1 C178 Any sort of distortion observed in the shadow image in the pupil of the patient, such condition should be discarded for treatment. : : wiearerarat = ett aferenasfeiref agy faam ae wr taeda a: 11 C.17/4
268 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana If any sorts of deformity observed in body parts in the shadow of the person in moonlight, sunlight, light of a lamp, water or mirror. He should be considered as ghost and rejected for treatment. fom feats sporesen sen atswaferents ta at 1 wet wet feof farm fae a aris ums ot: af wien fanfea: wat oqyiat far 2 Seeeaffiram: 11 C. I 7/5-6 Observation of shadow of a patient as broken, torn, hazy, devoid of certain organs, seeing excess organs, not conspi- cuous, bifurcated, deformed and without head, such other simi- lar abnormal shadows if develops without any apparent cause it is considered as severe morbidity. weara wana aft wear qari orn faadd oer taste ta wa a: 11 C.17/7 Distortion of shadow in healthy individual in respect of changes in shape, measurement, colour and lustre should be considered as omnious sign. aererafeagean qea ft a att Teameg Age wert ffast zo 1! wftoreroriearat worregtrarfag | BIT a et Mites wren avian 1 | oC. 1 7/8-9 The term samsthana means shape which may be symmetri- cal or asymmetrical. Measurement is ef three kinds namely medium, short, large. The image reflected in water, mirror, sun etc., corresponding to the measurement and shape of the body of the individual is known as praticchaya which is nothing but reflected shadow based on the colour and lustre of the individual. f ngeccemmere geen pe Arista - 269 Signs of Imminent Death armenisainfa yo sigan | wrested wa ad uf is Patient who is suffering from kamala, swelling in face, wasting in temples, terrifying appearance with high fever such patient should be discarded for management. Tea: wean wae aft Bt AT: qedet ward siaft fase: ut Patient who faints again and again while being lifted from bed cannot survive for a week. dat wert aed ufaeinrgqeteet: 1 wamrat weit wre: aisdart a vtafti1 cr 7/20 The patient afflicted with multiple dosas having upward, downward directions of movement along with disordered grahani cannot survive for longer than for a fortnight. SST wr aafytreareaasat: | ag gag emer a ufasitqiy cy 7/21 Consumption of little quantity of food by emaciated per- son but exceretes large amount of urine and stool should be discarded for management. qdet ag Ge a: Wa mENATT:! aeapyties do hada Git cl 7/22 Consumption of excess quantity of food by weak patient but passes scanty urine and stool] should be considered as ghost or almost dead. ‘ge oa quedawmercnit at at) wea ananiva daa a a cafes is Inspite of taking suitable dietetics if person constantly looses strength and complexion indicates bad prognosis. Cc. I 7/18 C. 1 7/19 C. 1 7/23
270 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana gia owafafa fefeet aivardats acta: foorant: yesren a asitaftit = c. 7 7/24 If a person who is weak, thirsty and having dryness of mouth, if he suffers from groaning, dyspnoea and diarrhoea, then it should not be treated because he will not survive. oe aa: vafate enfaa wea a a: wa ow osama oad: iC. 7/25 If patient is suffering from shallow respiration with irregu- lar twitchings in the body is said to be severe fatal condition like almost dead. ma aa: wafafa seer anfayad | dravaerent a at a a staf C. 1 7/26 Person who is suffering from respiratory distress with abun- dance of kapha along with diminution of complexion, strength and less intake of food. He will not survive for longer. sam we a wa waraaat arm: feared: yeareat aa sitaft i) c. 1 -7/27 A weak, thirsty and dryness of mouth if observed in indi- vidual, whose eyes are slanted in the carotid region of the neck, will not survive. aeaq Twerquheadt sata a areuit | yet wate ara afer ad 3 faeate 11 C. 1 7/28 If a person having prominent cheeks along with high fe- ver, severe cough, colic and dislike for food, ‘he will not cure from his ailments. archaea fret wet taeda a: 1 arent yal ur a freqt i c.1 7/29 If there is a distortion of the head, tongue and face, droop- ing of eye brows and appearance of thorny coat over tongue, don’t treat such patients due to its omnious nature. Oe Arista 271 Tesradyiens Freadt gat wry amiga faqafat fae Rate C1730 Whose penis is excessively shrunken along with pendu- lous testicles or vice versa, such signs are indicative of death of a patient immediately. ; hres AAR: aE AAI) | CL 7/37 In emaciated individual whose muscles are excessively un- dergone wasting with remnants of skin and bone does not sur- vive more than one month. ae vara after efta ala ats at enfara Fee fasted C.19/3 In patient whose eyes are blackish, green and devoid of vision indicates death of the patient. Pda: oftgeara: wget enftifass a: 1 sear grat aw oat: aftastay 1 C.19/4 The patient who is unconscious along with dryness of mouth | associated with aggravation of disease indicates bad prognosis & such patient should not be entertained for treatment. ghas fr ae viivgears dam: | aistenhrerdt «gee: | firrerorrsya i C.19/5 A person who is suffering from pittaja diseases having greenish discolouration of sird (vessels) along with obstruction to hair follicles and desire to take sour preparations will suc- cumb to death suddenly. wirngs yet wit staged aci a ttt oer tsaam fered aq 11 C. 1 9/6 A patient of rajayaksma if suffers from plumpness of the extremities but having emaciation of truak associated with dimi- nution of strength, surely he will die.
272 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana srenfaamt frat a odd vifirrer a1 arte: wast a waeraa vile: 11 C.19/7 A patient of rajayaksm4@ associated with burning sensa- tion in shoulder region, hiccup, haemoptysis, distended abdo- men due to constipation with pain in sides of chest lead to death of the patient. arentraamt get viet avitetts qed a wget a usa a at ae 11 safer wat aemiaert aft steht faanty am fam uftasitt i: cc. 19/3-9 A patient who is suffering from vata vyadhi, apasmara, kustha, Sopha, udara roga, gulma, madhumeha do not respond to any treatment, if these diseases associates. with diminution of strength and muscles. Similarly other diseases having dimin- ished strength & muscles are discarded for management. fatergaam = aegemgndt =a: fatten: yamenft ger fae al) cr 9/10 If patient suffering from anaha- gets relief after purgation therapy but subsequently develops thirst and suffers from anaha again inspite of purgation, should be considered as bad prog- nosis & patient will die soon. Ra on 3 weft Sve a yee a sas fagerearnt ata a sfaftis CII A person who is unable to drink liquid substances due to dryness of throat, mouth and chest does not survive. vara ogden wii a aeravten: | Wafer At gaat Annes 1 C.1 9/12 If patient develops weakness in voice, diminution of Strength and complextion and aggravation of disease with- out any apparent cause indicate the imminent death of the pa- tient. ae Arista 273 Bedard =o ndtert = ypiaedagory | wi writers = gfe uftasiay i C1 9/13 If patient develops respiratory distress, subnormal tempera- ture, pain in the groins and no response observed inspite of proper treatment, such patient should be discarded for manage-' ment. sat anager qa: uftasiaq i C.1 9/14 A patient who talks in feeble voice about the advent of his own death and having auditory hallucinations should be dis- carded for management. fFreagt a git a taseafa asata | wet TeNqN: | eretargetifiror: 11 C.1 9/18 If the sputum, stool and semen sink in water, such patients should not be treated because their survival period is almost ended. Freya ger qed anf agfren: gee | aca ec: wr a a sitfaquedfer ii C.1 9/19 Appearance of various colours in sputum and which sinks in water cannot survive for long. freaerpi aa wet we fagedias aim: wget aren froarafa sift Person who is. suffering from Sankhaka, which manifest due to interaction of the vitiated pitta with agni in the temporal region. It kills the patient within 3 days. wet sit acer qgrenq vftead | yes ged ofa: seemetaenfe: 11 C1 9/21 The patient who is suffering from pain in the lower abdo- men and froathy haemoptysis frequency then such patients should not be treated. C.I 9/20
274 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Nijfiana worTaaarredtat Wrgkawras: | Tan ced ahve a vet i C1 9/22 - Sudden diminution of strength and muscles along with aggravation of disease with anorexia, such patients will not sur- vive more than three fortnights. wearorabaa atites (Sadyomaranamindriya Arista) Signs and symptoms indicative of impending sudden death (Sadhyomaranamindriya) wateitad: wicca ges gerne | afar! vant dest af stati: C7103 The following symptomatology indicates the omnious na- ture and patient will not survive. aarsten qe front aeor 21 Torasfaatirr wet yoonfs sari! C7 10/4 If vatasthila patient suffers from severe thirst and excessively aggravated dosas enters the cardiac region and kills the person. faftses fifsettgre fagtara a afr 1 ay: WAR fer wet qonhe Siar 11 wat wer we wrmencieg are: | wea feared ter: welt Gooner sift) C1 10/5-6 Agitated vayu circulates all over the body and develops Slackness in calf muscles along with crooked nose. If hiccup develops in a patient who has drooping of the eyebrows and excessive burning sensation in body. aitorenfirrrreaer aR | st wa wa ger wet qomfa sifeMl) C7107 Aggravated vata moving upwards and brings affliction in carotid region of the neck in a person who is having diminution of blood and muscles. : Arista 275 Bao Ys Tee Al a weershre: | Peer Gaol Yea wert qenfa sifar_ii = c. 1 10/8 Agitated vayu moves suddenly from anus to umbilicus and produces affliction in groin in a weak patient. far ouykaroin adits «Area: | faites wel qari start it = c. 1 10/9 Agitated vayu enters chest and stretches the tips of ribs & obstruct the normal functions in chest and whose eyes are di- lated along with cold and clammy body. eet a Te aA Yee Aredt seit qdera fagaor wet yore sifeary ts dav a ye ait yetat uedt acl | gr waged: BE wena sitar C7 10/10-11 Agitated vayu seizes the functions of anus and heart in weak patient. If agitated powerful vata seizing groins and anus along with respiratory distress. cif wi aftayiht gtd emf area: 1 wkedt wasp wel quenft sifamyit = c. 7 10/72 Agitated vayu enters the umbilicus, urine, kidneys and stool and manifest pain and affliction in these areas. frat demit oer ara: aed: | fit att gen a ce: wongefa G: tl C7 10/13 Agitated vata enters groin region and manifest pricking pain in groin region along with diarrhoea and thirst. are Arete VR ae Baer | faa git gon a uel wea a Sif C1 10/14 Agitated powerful vata pervades all over the body along with diarrhoea and thirst.
276 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana wR wife ae aries afr: 1 fet gad gam a wet sang a sic. 10/15 If agitated vata develops fotha in entire body along with diarrhoea and thirst. TATTGAT TET TAR aftenftteat 1 fast git gen a ae: woneeft a1) C7 10/16 If agitated vata enters the GmaSaya and develops sawing pain along with diarrhoea and thirst. Cara aera uftarftaar TUN Tere: wet wera site iy. 10/17 ; If agitated vata enters pakvdsaya and develops cutting pain in that region along with diarrhoea and thirst. Ceasar sea Ue AT aed | aud date ser wet eft sia C7 10/18 Development of stertorous breathing in the throat and un- conscious due to vata having its site of manifestation in pakvasaya, am: aden ge yuieafray | foorra a ooenfin fae at afer: 1) C7 70/19 If teeth appears as if annointed with mud, face as if cov- ered with ashes and excessive perspiration. Toran raedtairagat: 1 PE: WON ae MAT: 11 C1020 Development of diarrhoea in a patient who is suffering from thirst, dyspnoea, disorders of head, unconsciousness, de- bility and groaning sound from the throat are the signs of im- minent death due to diminution of bodily heat. Ut Twat at wee BAT C113 Arista 277 Whose body heat is diminished, absence of concentration of mind, loss of complexion, weakness of mind and absence of attachment for life indicate the death of person within one year. afar afeigdt acer wold Algae! chart: fwd yer dat a1) C1 11/4 Whose offering is refused by crows indicates death within a year. fanen fahiit a: vitergqert er wait at fast wart wer sitfari: C1 11/6 Sudden gain or loss of lustre, corpulence or wealth with- out any appropriate cause indicate the death of the patient one year there after. ute: vici aireart afaderegary | watt fade = wefeateeiivert it Co 11/7 Cessation of inclination, conduct, memory, sacrifice, in- tellect and strength without any apparent cause indicate the death of the person within six. months. seritaragatirt TAA | mene «gy wea ware a slaft 11 C.1 11s Development of exceedingly shining net work of vessels in the forehead indicates death within six months. renfis-anfaetrreqaetarat 1 ae derge: sefaataed antes) 9 c.7 11/9 Appearance of crescent shaped streaks over forehead in- dicates death within six months. wikem: dale wfdata a wea wet me at Saft) Cc. 111/10 If the tremors in the body, stupor, gait and speech resemble to that of intoxicated person indicates death within a month.
278 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Virgie ser asa wear a War waraer wegartfor weft it Cori If the semen, urine and feces of a person sinks when placed on water and there is aversion for his own relatives, then he succumbs to death within one month. were wa ae favre qua: | yaad ar fat term we wae a staf cor 11/12 Sudden emaciation or swelling in upper extremties, lower extremities and face without undergoing any changes in the body, he does not survive for moré than one month. were yet weit a diem wer wena | weit merger a oa osifaqudftir cr 11/73 Appearance of crescent shaped blue streaks in the fore- head, head and pelvic region indicates person will not survive longer. wareniicaiaea wer mat walter: | sueng, farvata a fen a faavaftr) cor 1/4 If a person develops eruptions of masurika having the ap- pearance of coral beads and disappear instantaneously indicates death of the patient suddenly. tararet aeraiaerragta wl TAM aT Wed TAME CL 1I/15 If patient is suffering from squeezing pain in neck, glossitis inflammation in inguinal glands, mouth, throat should be con- sidered as matured for death. dats farendisfatals eurafserest: ware aea ELT wade il CT 11/16 Three omnious triad are excessive giddiness, extreme de- lirium and breaking pain in bones indicates person is in peak for death. Arista | _ 279 WHE weed Aer uitgeeniia a | Wt: «© Faeyaalenaaem: = «owreraifea: tC 11/17 A weak person who pulls out his hair in a state of uncon- sciousness and eats food in excessive quantity as if he is a healthy man, is as good as dead. whe agqat: wet jWraageitacy wast a amr sedmiater: 11 C7 11/18 A person whose vision is fixed and directed upwards, who searches for his hands and fingers which are placed in front of his eyes and smiles while doing so, succumbs to death immedi- ately. PRATER SMS BSaTTETAT aT | aera fafa yer, sreteitfea: vt C7 11/19 Due to hallucination a person gropes for a nonexistent things in the beds, seats, limbs of the body, wooden blocks or walls, should be considered as nearer to death. A : a + virgata dt mi a a vefti cr 11720 A person, who out of delusion laughs in circumstances where there is no cause for laughter, who licks his lips and whose feet, hands and breathing are cold does not survive. wert wet wat waa a! werent: « ugesa a ugaltit Cri A person with his mind shrouded with great delusion (in- dicative of immediate death) does not see things even though his eyes are unaffected and calls out for his relatives and other people who are actually standing nearly in the range of his vi- sual field. sranrarart ar wit afr, faog ert ynugwar fest AeA C1 1122
280 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiaina Persons who are unable to have perception of the objects of senses which are existent and simultaneously having per- ception of the objects of senses which are nonexistent, should not be treated. afi tnt was a@ereran arargafr fant owt tesa aufenrafiract alfifrarriaer t aaasaaa fia fen waft at a atic. 711/23-24. Excessive aggravation of the disease and diminution of will-power results in the departure-of the soul from his physical above. When the span of life comes to an end there is diminu- tion of complexion, voice as well as the power of digestion, speech, senses and the mind and the person either sleeps al- ways or does not get sleep at all. fertesnrenetiafrser ai arm: we wad sateen aaa wey tr: maa Fest oufied | ae geita a dieaaf wet C1 11/25-26 The person who is having aversion for physicians, medi- cines, drinks, preceptors and friends should be considered as nearer to death. eae Target set fan aftr quite: i) 9.71127 Non availibility of four limbs of treatment indicates death. wWerenghicn deere F | areata aremaraat wyada th C1128 The physician shiould examine the span of life of the healthy as well as diseased persons because the entire treatment de- pends on this. Arista 281 wa Treguis gol yeh aad wet wad da ari ae siferpiy cc. 12/3 If an unctous powder resembling that of cowdung appears on head and disappears after application of oil, he may survive for only one month. fresfira: a: uel wqara: ufterafir fanen aa cilesftafat aafa amet) 9 Cc. 1 12/4 Due to morbidity in the body person walk with legs rubbing together and drooping of shoulders does not live longer. we erergierena ye A Te amg wdinag dseat 3 aftr C1125 Chest become dried’ up soon after bath or application of unction, in comparison to other body parts does not live longer for more than a fort night. amar + senlfa geist aca sifarqi: = c.1 12% If physician fails to administer proper therapy due to non availibility of remedial measures. Such patient will not sur- vive. faard age: fee faftrercenaenfiery: 7 faeanitest ace safer cer feferteerray tC. 1 12/7 Inspite of administration of well known therapeutic rem- edy, which is well tested and administered according to the prin- ciples of treatment, if patient does not respond it indicates incurability. merger faasrt o_o a: wet wer arent geist are sitfemyit = Cc. 7 12/8 Properly administered diet to patient does not produce t the desired effect, such patient will succumb to death. 20VIk.&Roga =,
282 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana qeferenreret awifts (Dhittadhikaragamya Arista) at quar faerep ws: WRIRSATaTETTAA ULC. 7 12/9 Characteristic features of messenger who comes to take the physician to patient’s house indicating death are as follows. qeaisa wt BdrarTds Ta | ; foqnead geet eat OTe tC. 12/10 If messenger arrives physican house as dishevelled, na- ked, weeping or unattentive should predict the severity of the disease. qa fiat a gufe<entt a firatt amraptat firey dat + rakcagaay, WooC.112/11 If messenger reaches the physician house when physician is asleep or cutting or breaking something. aa gm a amnta a era wfrataa: it c. 7 12/12 If messenger arrives when physician offering oblations to the fire or bolus to the forefathers. maaan == faaracraat a: | as a aqennerreta WAL AIC. 7 12/13 If méssenger reaches physician house when physician is thinking about inauspicious things or talking about inauspicious things. . Feerafeer aft = caret | amerenft ura at gar qyetarlit Cc. 7 12/14 If messenger arrives when the physician thinking or speak- ing about dead, burnt, or destroyed things or such other inaus- picious substances. Arista — 283 farm ae areisaat fag | arava «= TATE UNL C7 12/75 If messenger comes in a place or time similar to the dis- ease in properties. davitegereraierrrrdt ferry i Wr Sredig wsia gam freamyqeary it c. 1 12/16 If messenger arrives at the physicians house when the fire is burning nearby or during after noon to get remedy for raktapitta patient, which coincided with fire and time. oer ai fay eafat daar Gier wdinnaft a at. megaete tt Co 1217° If messenger is anxious, frightened, hurried, terrified, un- clean, unchaste woman, if number of accompanied person is three, possessing deformed organs, eunuch. argurebryarat GUETTaTEAT | at get firafieemengrer wee Cc. 7 12/18 If messenger is deformed, ascetic, suffering frofX some disease, or engaged in harsh activities. eee Rees ore SET, 1 att geet wydyureat = freq c. 1 12/19 If messenger reaches the physician house in a vehicle car- tied by a donkey or camel. Wass wt cea a aadest oo get eater | aqart il c.7 12/20 Before meeting the physician, if the messenger touches the straw, chaff, flesh, bone, hair of the head, small hair of the body, nail, teeth, boom, pounding rod, winnowing tray, shoes, grass, wood pieces, husk, charcoal, earthen clod or stone.
284 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana as at gaft arranges | wafainegs od wa ameaiarg il C7 12/21 If the physician comes across bad omen while the messen- ger is describing the condition of the patient. aa oarert ad Reese ati Cc. 72/22 If physician comes across a sorrowful person, dead body, evil spirits. If physician observes following changes before or during or after reviewing the message are as follows— fast at fats af aati aif are Tat at Heneitat wat at aronit Aer | weil a faqe: wt assays aT 11 agdafad are areceresae ya: | qari ered ger a aconnfest 11 sf quftenisaqe: arent qavart c. 7 12/23-25 Physician seeing something cut, burnt and destroyed or the sound of statements describing such incidents or tastes which are intensely pungent taste, or stinky smell like that of corpse or touch of things which are exceedingly harsh, or such other inauspicious entities. uf sitar [Pathi Cautpatikarn (Incidents in physician’s -way to patient’, 's house)] Water wv aad ga: tl Cc. 7 12/25 If physician come across certain incidents on his way tc patient’s house or at: the time of arrival at his residence are as follows, which indicates death. arate: teent at wfetet fandom i TATOO AAT POAT ARTE, i art oat omit. qarefat qari) c. 1712/27 Arista 285 Sneezing, crying, slipping, falling, angry expression, beat= ing, refutation, despising, reviling, fall or defection of cloth, turban, upper garment, umbrella and shoes. Coming across- the people mourning due to death of some body. arava goat want a wabremaers gwot = wenorgfa: it c. 7 12/28 Falling of sacred tree like caitya (fig tree), flag staff, flag or pitcher full of water. Arrival of information related to death or other inauspicious things. Pollution by ashes or dust. weasel frst ya ator a qt 1 aif pont fret dat feet aft it Tea ETL serarersrentt wafwargHifirot: 11C. 1 12/29-30 Crossing the road by cat, dog or snake. Cries of cruel ani- mals like jackals and vultures from the direction of south. See- ing beds, seats, chairs, vessels which are stretched or turned upside down. SMH ASAI M (Aturakule Bhavavasthantarani)- [Bad omens observed in patient residence] waft uf aa Gras saTaeAht i svat a a Tree mem feafara 1 Cc. I 12/31-32 The characteristic features while entering as well as inside the patient’s house which indicates bad or omnious nature are as follows— west pigeanttandionncrattany | qorennetsant = = Pr Cc. 7 12/33 | During entrance into patient’s house physician should ob-
286 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana serve the protentous condition. of the patient’s house i.e. going out of pitcher full of water, fire, earth, seeds, fruit, ghee, bull, brahmana, precious stones, prepared food and idols of god. afagnifa ceri fret fafa a1 fawe gyvat aya wlastta avait c.7 12/34 While entering into patient’s house he may see the vessels full of fire which are either broken or with the flameless. fof owe acnh vant ai eden a aed yaaidivae sem: ti oc. 1 12/35. If family members. of the patient using substances which are broken, cracked, burnt, split, kneaded or weak. we aw wt wei ane or qaasage ara ae wer Fatesfermry it c. 7 12/36 The patient whose bed, cloth, vehicle, gait, food and voice bears inauspiciousness. wet at ana asf ufteaq: Reena pdr qee: Ba wa Sit C1 12/37 Arrangement of bed, cloth, vehicle and other instruments and things which are befitting: for dead bodies. at owameseat = wsifagetayiate | far 2m gear aca cafes fafeefterrqai c. 7 12/38 While preparing the food, if the food gets exceedingly damaged or the fire gets extinguished even though there is no wind and the fuel is inadequate quantity or the food is rotten. stg we wea feet ot cata ar afeasarnin git ace. sifamil oc. 7 12/39 Breaking of utensils, earthen pot frequently in a kitchen or house. Arista 287 Signs of Impending Death While approaching death, the process of destruction is ini- tiated in the body, functions of various limbs and, organs of the body get disturbed. Soul desires to leave the body and life which _ were liked by him earlier and migrate to another body before it succumbs to final darkness (death). As proposed earlier the signs which are manifested and the modifications which ‘take place in the individual and his soul during this time will now be de- scribed. This is based upon the scriptural authority. They are as follows : : e Affliction of prana (vital breath). e Clouding of understanding. e Drainage of strength from limbs. e Cessation of movements. e Destruction of sensory faculties. e Impairment of consciousness. e Restlessness in the mind. e Affliction of the mind with fear. e Deprivation of memory, intellect, hrri (natural modesty) and Sri (lustre) of the body. e Aggravation of papmd (diseases caused by sinful acts). @ Destruction of Ojas (strength) and complexion. e Radical change in the conduct. , e@ Change in likings. e Perversion in the reflected image and lustre of the indi- vidual. : | @ Expulsion of the semen from its normal site. . @ Upward movement of vayu. « Wasting of muscle, tissue and blood. e Diminution of the zsmas (factors responsible for the pro- duction of heat including digestion and metabolism).
288 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiiana e Dislocation of joints. e@ Morbid change in the smells of the body. e Hoarseness of voice and impairement of complexions. e Discoloration of the body. ¢ Dryness in the orifices. of the body. ¢ Appearance of smoke in the head. e Appearance of a substance like the power of cowdung. _ in the head which is indicative of imminent death. e Complete cessation of pulsation in the parts (organs) of the body which pulsate constantly in normal conditions. © Manifestation of attributes of opposite nature in those parts of the body which are either cold, hot, soft or rough; and similar other features. ) © Appearance of puspa (white spots) in nails and adher- ence of mud like substance in teeth. © Mating of eye-lashes and manifestation of simantas (line caused by the parting of hair) in the head. © Difficulty in obtaining the desired drugs and even if such drugs are obtained, their actions are not manifested in conso- nance with their potency. e Sudden manifestation of serious diseases of diverse types and requiring different types of treatment by over powering the strength and ojas. © Manifestation of inauspicious sound, touch, taste, vision, smell, action and thought in the physician while treating such’ patients. e@ Appearance of cruel dreams and manifestation of evil disposition for the patient. ' @ Hostility of the messenger and change in complexion to that of a dead person. e Diminution of the normal characteristic features of the body and aggravation of the morbid conditions. Arista 289 e Manifestation of all the inauspicious signs all of a sudden. Death information should be kept secret The physician should not announce the imminence of death without being specially requested for that, even if he is aware of the onset of such bad prognostic signs. Even when specially requested, he should not say anything about the approaching of death because it distress the patient as well as relative. The wise physician should however refrain from treating such patients having signs of imminent death without making announcement of the approaching death. Good prognostic signs should be exposed If the physician comes across auspicious signs of recov- ery of the patient as indicated by e Characteristic features of the messenger. 7 , @ Autpatika (sudden manifestation of certain auspicious signs). ’ e Signs in the physician’s way to patient’s house. e@ Characteristic features of the patient’s residence. e@ Manner and conduct of the patient. e Availability of drugs at ease, he should make this an- nouncement positively. Messengers indicating good prognosis The following types of messengers are to be considered as auspicious, because it signifies good prognosis. © Who is with good conduct and pleasant behaviour. ° e Who is not devoid of any organ of his body. e Who is of repute and clad with white cloths. @ Who is not completely shaved (having a Sikha or a tuft of hair in the crown of the head), and whose hair is not matted. e Who is similar in caste, dress and action.
290 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana @ Who has not come in a vehicle carried by camel or donkey. e Who has not come at the time of Sandhya (morning or evening or twilight). e@ Who has come at a time when the cruel planets are not situated in the inauspicious houses of the zodiac. @ Who has come at a time when the Uttaraphdlguni, Uttarasadha, Uttarabhadrapada and Rohini are auspicious and on auspicious tithis barring 4th, 9th and 14th days of paksa (unar fort-night). @ Who has come at a time other than the noon or midnight when there is no earthquake and when there is no eclipse. @ Who has come to a place which is not defamed and which is devoid of inauspicious characteristics. e Who is not perturbed. Incidents observed while entering patient’s house indicating geod prognosis If while entering or on his way to patient’s house, the phy- sician comes across the following, then he can predict the re- covery of the patient. e Curd, aksata (grains of intact rice), Brahmana, bulls, King, gems, pitchers full of water, white horse, flags and ban- ners dedicated to Indra, fruits, Grains of-barley; boys and- girls seated on the lap (or boys, girls and earthen plate), an animal of good breed tied to a rope, cultivated land, kindled fire, sweets, - white coloured flower, sandle paste, delicious food articles and drinks, a cart fully loaded with human beings, a cow together with a calf, a mare with her calf, a woman with her child, cakora (cukor), siddhartha (2), sarasa (crane), odtaka (sparrow), swain, | Satapatra, casa (blue joy), peacock, fish, goat, elephant tusk, ‘priyangu (Callicarpa macrophyla Vahl), ghee, rucaka (orna- ments of horses), mirror, white mustard, gorocand (bile of cow), fragrance, white complexion, sweet taste, sweet and auspicious voices of animals, birds and human beings, unfolding of um- brellas, flags and banners, prayers, sound of cattle drums, drums Arista , 291 and conches, Punyaha (auspicious sounds), Sounds of vedic recitations and soothing. wind from the south direction. Signs of good prognosis : The foliowing are the auspicious signs indicative of a sure success in the treatment of a patient:— e Engagement in a auspicious acts, faithfulness and favor- able disposition of the patient and his kinsmen. © Collection of adequate funds and other accessories. @ Attainment of wealth, power and happiness. e Easy access to desirable objects. e Easy availability of drugs; and favorable effect of these drugs when administered. «® Dreams like climbing on house roof, palace, hill, el- ephant, bull, horse and human being; vision of the moon, the sun, fire, .Brahmana, cow and, man of repute; swimming in the ocean; improvement of health; end of sufferings; dialogue with the gods and forefathers in their pleasing mood; vision of white — garments ‘and a clean lake; intake of meat, fish poison and amedhya (unclean) objects; use of umbrella and mirror; vision of white flowers; riding of horses, bulls:and chariots and mov- ing towards the north-east; weeping; rising after fall and; sub- jugation of enemies. Moreover appearance of noble qualities, faithful devotion to physicians and Brahmana, subjective feeling of curability of diseases, freedom from anxiety constitute the signs and symp- toms of quick recovery from illness. A man of auspicious char- acteristics attains strength, longevity, happiness and other de- sirable objects only when he possesses good health. So, knowledge of arista is essential to know about the prog- nosis & longevity of the patient.
Chapter 15 wafer (Vyadhiksamatva) a fe watrqosntt qradrantiin, aa ad dhe: ger gen: Taz walfar erin enftreracd wrath cata 1 C. Su 28/07 During certain conditions, or due to certain factors, even unwholesome food does not produce diseases immediately. All unwholesome food articles are not equally harmful, all dosas are not equally powerful, all persons are not capable of resist- ing diseases. waiters onitrerciferctitnres cmreqrare wfrarerancetate aren | C. Su 28/7 (Cakrapani) Resistance to diseases or immunity against diseases is of two kinds i.e. the one which attenuate the manifested disease and other variety prevents the manifestation of diseases. Factors s Which h Overcome Vyadhiksamatva a va ae: dqEahigeaioam asia: worst wren witaenfa asa: ferraarfe wage Guaa: witherftt ureatfiraertt | wearpearreanert aie wretched emer geet aren: faraqentarnftrga vata 1 a wer arisen: earrfarste sapfiren earferfersteraf errata ae | C. Su 28/07 Unwholesome food substances become more harmful de- pending upon the nature of the locality, time, combination, potency and excessive quantity. For example, vriki type of corn is unwholesome because it aggravates pitta. The same become » + Vyadhiksamatva 293 more unwholesome if consumed by marshy land (Gnupadesa) people, the same become less harmful if consumed by dhanvadesa people. It is more unwholesome during Sarad rtu (autumn season) and less harmful in hemanta ytu (winter season). If it is consumed with curd, phanita (penidium) become more unwholesome and the same become less harmful if con- sumed with honey. If consumed hot it is more unwholesome and the same if taken in cold condition becomes less harmful. If consumed more in quantity become more unwholesome and become less harmful if consumed less in quantity. C. Su 28/07 (Cakrapani) The dosas are exceedingly painful, acute and difficult to cure during their multiple combinations, if they require mutu- ally contradictory therapies, if they are deep seated i.e. TAL TA gfe wie Aes FA: | C. Su 28/7 (Cakrapani)-deeper dhatu like majja etc. are involved in the pathogenesis of disease. If disease is chronic i.e. [farted Sa 22 Parareraeert HOTA, HBAMSUA: | C. Su 28/7 (Cakrapani)| it become very difficult to cure because they are deep seated and gives displeasure and disease becomes incurable. If dasa pranayatana are involved in the disease process along with other vital organs like Ardaya etc, then disease be- come difficult to cure. If vital organs afflicted, then disease become difficult to cure. e If disease manifest instantaneously indicates disease become very difficult to cure. The following persons are unable to resist diseases e Over obese individual
294 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Over emaciated pérson Whose muscles and blood are diminished markedly Debilitated person One who consumes unwholesome food One who consumes Jess amount of food Whose mental faculties are weak On the other hand, individuals having opposite type of physical constitution are czzable of resisting diseases. auaaerifa enequienulisrrentht | C. Su 28/7(Cakrapani) Vyadhisaha means one who is capable of resisting dis- ‘eases. Depending on the nature of unwholesome food, condi- tion of vatadi dosas and person who is not capable of resisting diseases suffers from diseases either mild or severe, acute or chronic. Vata, pitta, kapha manifests different diseases depending upon their vitiation at various places. Contributing Factors for Vyadhiksamatva Factors which contributes for vyadhiksamatva are normal dosa, equilibrium state of dhatu, normal agni, patency of srotas etc., or factors which supports the equilibrium state of all physi- ° ‘ogical parameters. These points are described below. vara angaraary | c. Su 1/24 (Gangadhara) Equilibrium state of dhdtu is. called svastha, : suet Bq: resriiypeiaig ereeorercorahied Tee | C. Su 1/24 (Gangadhara) Upayogi hetu (useful etiological factors) are those useful to the body and they indulge in protection of dhatus, which is important for homeostatic condition of body and mind. aqaratran aha waeITed KAA | C. Su 1/53 Aim and object of Ayurveda is the maintenance of equilib- rium state of tissue elements. Vyadhiksamatva _ 295 TATA: | TAA et C. Su 5/89 Regular oil massage leads to strong body physique. AATAGRINT,....... AAUP GEIGT | C. Su 5/8 Consumption of proper amount of food certainly helps the individual in bringing strength, complexion, happiness and lon- gevity. Tard eae Teradata den eaerihea Aareat Searafet wag | C. Su 5/103 A intelligent person should be vigilant about his duties towards his own body like an office in charge of a city and a charioteer towards the city and the chariot respectively. So, wise person should protect his body both externally and internally by adopting dinacarya in his daily routine. at wereTAT es BeAr, fetaqzi = C. Su 7/60 Person who is desirous of healthy should adopt the healthy practices related to diet, conduct and activities. aed wafteerd | TSSAHARS wo 1 CSU Equilibrium state of dhatu is health and gives rise to piea- sure. A STRTPT FAN — TET: rach, nerfs ufatatreyie \ Cc. Su 11/35 There are three factors, which supports life i.e. @hara (food), svapna (sound sleep) and brahmacarya (one who is having control over his senses and full 6f spiritual bliss). By this body will be endowed with strength, complexion, growth and live longer, provided if person doesn’ t indulge in factors which deteriorate health. fiat anfafa—vesi, arti, overt a | C. Su. 11/36
296 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Strength is of 3 types i.e. sahaja (constitutional), kdlaja (temporal) and yuktikrta (acquired). A. Sahaja bala . . Aes were: wend 1 C. Su 11/36 It is an inherent characteristic property of an individual present since birth. It is because of equilibrium state of dosds. B. Kdlaja bala PRAHA AI TAA TI C. Su 11/36 Kalaja bala is dependent on season and age. Loss of strength is observed in adanakala, gaining of strength is observed in visarga kala and middle age is consid- ered as full of strength. Qfend qreeenderinery | C. Su 11/36 Acquired strength is dependent on healthy practices re- lated to diet, activities etc. deren afer fasrmearaneaht Sereaerant: | C. Su 11/36 (Cakrapani) Performing excercises with proper methods by giving rest in between different exercises. Other says that SFA Y SH vRaaare Wat elt | C. Su 11/36 (Cakrapani) Other considered yoga as rasayan therapy. — : C. Su 11/36 (Gangadhara) Vajikarana yogas helps to acquire strength by fullfilling necessary deficiencies in deficient dhatus. wrabrared wate saat raha | C. Su 11/43 Proper utilisation of sense organs with their objects, nor- mal actions and normal seasons are beneficial in the mainte- nance of good health. Vyadhiksamatva 297 sosee MARR TEIERT: URRIPRRE: wis, sreetsqafa: 1 (C. Su 12/8) C. Su 12/8 (Cakrapani) WN PHT: INA TAHT | C. Su 12/8 (Gangadhara) Compactness indicates healthy state of the body. Vata brings about compactness in all tissue elements of the body and promotes union of the body. Wa......Ta Yara ferry | C. Su 13/14 Ghee is conducive to rasadhatu, Sukradhatu and ojas. aie: weengqant aenfersrfatea | Cc. Su 13/14 (Gangadhara) Ojas is the essence of all dhatus and body strength de- pends on ojas. C. Su 13/14 Oil does not aggravate kapha but enhances body strength. Majja enhances strength and it also adds to the physical strength espescially to asthidhatu. Worse et frat cass Sit; Ureancaterga wast ayrTEd | C. Su 17/73-75 Superior quality ojas situated in hrdaya and its quantity is eight drops. Other type of ojas is ordinary one and which is dwelling in vessels attached to the heart and its quantity is half anjali. 21 Vik. & Roga
298 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana WTR HoT VeTHN,..... | a ae: BC. Su 17/117 Equilibrium state of kapha promotes strength, that’s why normal kapha is called ojas. aerisireara yer: aul geri wet |. C. Su 13/117 (Gangadhara) Functions of normal kapha is like that of ojas. aap fe ofat ae......vifiTd...... 1 C. Su 24/4 Normal] blood promotes strength. fementaatt wes wa yea ghg at weft tC. Su 25/31 Wholesome food is the only sole cause for the growth of living being. i) HaHa Tew ii) AAA FATT | iii) ARTI Tara | iv) FATES THHTOT | v) FeyPRR eA | i) Meat of cock is strength promoter. ii) Amalaki causing rejuvenation. iii) Habitual use of ghee and milk causes rejuvenation. iv) Regular consumption of food having all tastes promotes strength. v) Desert land is healthy land. vi) Sweet taste, sour taste enhances strength. C. Su 26/42 seurevahasdeta att araawi Cc. sv27/342 Strength, health, longevity and vital breath are dependent on the condition of agni. When the proper quantity of food and drinks supplied to a person which is commensurate with the power of digestion in the form fuel, which sustains the agni C. Su 25/40 Vyadhiksamatva 299 otherwise leads to abnormal functions. Wad: APL | C. Su 27/348 One who consumes wholesome food along with self con- trol lives longer with proper health for one thousand and thirty six nights (100 years) and these persons are blessed by noble man. wafee witri wuerasargenedd, dt scar, fer FOI, Shas AM, wearaalel edu Reread: wah; werd faal wert | C. Su 30/15 ® Non violence is the best among the promoters of longe- vity of living beings. e Virya.(semen) is the best among promoters of strength. e Knowledge is the best among promoters of nourishment. e Self control is the best for the promotion of delightfullness. e Knowledge of reality is the best among promoters of happiness. e@ Celibacy is the best among those leading to salvation. Weert CET ARTET TATA TATOTAT TR FACHTL WPT. C. Su 30/26 The main purpose and objectives of Ayurveda is the pres- ervation of health in healthy individual and eradication of dis- eases, which are curable. WAAAY a Get ae: | TaPRat repre a aS. saat. agian we: yitaearenaciere: | creat ers: wanted: | _C. Su 21/18-19 Person who is having balanced proportion of muscles, compactness, excellent sensory faculties never suffer from dis- eases. These people can easily withstand hunger, thirst, heat of the sun, cold and physical exercises. Agni performs normal di- gestion and metabolism activities.
_ 300 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana TeTorAa eae AAMT: | C. Vi 8/100 Sama prakrti individual possesses equilibrium state of dosas, dhatus and it is considered as best prekrti. Wa ad: Titete: Yoo Waa TEN: TUE: FASTAET: | . C. Vi 8/111 Person who is possessing excellence of all dhatus includ- ing mental faculties i.e. sarva sara are endowed with great strength, happiness and resistance to diseases. a femerntaeraet afterent faster: | a Aa: Aa: aaah? a weaentht: | , C. Sa 2/46 The following persons are free from diseases. Consumption of wholesome diet. Observation of wholesome behaviour. Unattached to sensual pleasures. One who donates regularly. Impartial in judgement. Who is always says truth. Endowed with forbearing (forgiveness) nature. One who devoted to learned people. FH wear a at aeafta ¢ agqaaha tm: | C. Sa 2/47 The following persons does not fall victiin of diseases. Person possessing excellent intellect. Acts and speech are leading to ultimate bliss. Independent thinking or excellent faculties. Clarity in understanding. Full of knowledge. Observation of spiritual activities. Continous yogic practices. “ Vyadhiksamatva 301 wae, walker, serena qo a aera, AAT Uae, Terqraaaaiga areanreretqufavad | C. Sa 6/8 For the maintenance of equilibrium state of dhdtus the fol- lowing adaptations are essential. e Proper use of actions and consumption of food con- trary to the properties of place, time and the self. e Avoid over utilization, non utilization and improper utilization of time, intellect and sense objects. e Non suppression of impelled urges. e Do not indulge in activities which are beyond ones own capacity. awa: a: aint: wart: das yor afstafsenenr- faartveraan die mcqata | C. Sa6/9 Dhdatus grows constantly by the use of the food substances and drinks having similar qualities or dominated by such quali- ties. aret witkafsecfead aren sata; ween arerat:, waura Gfafz:, srexdhoaq, aferravettr C. Sa 6/12 Complete uniform growth of the body takes place by fol- lowing factors. Kalayoga (Time factor) ware ain sft ahacnrcen dane area: | C. SG 6/12 (Cakrapani) dread fe cere aernenret al are aeeta afasiate | C. Sa 6/12 (Cakrapani) Young age is the period in which complete development of body dhdtus observed. Svabhavasamsiddhi (Natural favourable process) a cavradiferhagritvateae greet tC. Sa 6/12 (Cakrapani)
302 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Certain unseen factors favours the growth of the body natu-. rally is called svabhava samsiddhi. Ahdara Saustava (Excellence of diet) RE Arsaheaexe WaT | C. S& 6/12 (Cakrapani) Food substances possessing excellent properties and quali- ties which supports and fulfills the growing criteria for dhatus. Avighata (Absence of factors which deteriorate dhatu) aiearavata eritvaksfarertarcte erarr warearnefaxe: | C. S&@ 6/12 (Cakrapani) Avighata means absehce of factors which favours deterio- ration of dhatus, For example, excessive indulgence in sexual acts and affliction to mental faculties. werahsaueal wat watt | ale aeraqed Bt sea, AAATSY Sle a, Para weal: sisideryoRdgea, served, VR Ges, Ue Meee, Ura Woed, tamadiitave, deat a, ay a dedsae | ‘C. Sa 6/13. The following factors which favours the promotion of strength. e Birth of a person in a country where people are natu- rally strong. For example ‘sindha’ region people are strong by nature. e Time factor which is conducive for dhdtus and helps for promotion of strength. For example if person born during hemanta and Sisira ytu which favours the promotion of strength. e Excellency among qualities of bija (sperm) and ksetra (ovum and uterus) of parents. e Excellence of diet. e Excellence of physique. © Excellence of suitability. All mental faculties are superior. Vyadhiksamatva 303 e Natural mechanism. e Young age. e@ Excercise and such other physical activities. maramiicaatarar fit wet date | C. sa 6/13 (Cakrapani) Habitual performance of exercise promotes strength. Always in cheerful mood is also helpful to gain strength. aden wear: arora ear ware | C. S@ 6/29-30 Normal span of life in kaliyuga is 100 years. The following factors helps to live longer upto hundred years. e Excellent constitute i.e. sama prakrti wa wep carafe wep frat mgt farrgsta ! C. Sa 6/30 (Cakrapani) Prakrti sampat means person possessing equilibrium state of all dosds and it is called sama prakrti and these individuals live longer. Guna sampat i.e. excellent compactness of body. UTA | andere catain: fren ar EctatatT ACYTHUITRS OTH | C. Sa 6/30 (Cakrapani) e Excellent essence, compactness etc. e Natural excellent inherent qualities transformed from parents. ° Atma Sampat-Righteous acts. RI PARQ SRVA GA TA | C. $a 6/30 (Cakrapani) Observation of penace, indulging in right conducts helps for longevity.
o 304 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana AM Tees rana Mee Pon caer Saray: UsaTA: 1 ; S. Su 20/6 Celibacy, sleeping in a place which is devoid of breeze, hot water bath, sleeping during night, physical exercises are best adjustable to all as a wholesome substance. wa Ta BEA agai aq ot aera wrdirerda aofrgerd | S. Su 15/19 _ Ofjas is the essence of rasadhi dhatus and it is also called bala.. TAMA I BH TUTATHaaaas |S. Su 15/20 Strength gives stability and maintains compactness of muscles, energy to perform all kinds of activities without any hindrances, clarity in voice and complexion, both karmendriya _ and jfidnendriya performs their normal functions. TORT TA PAA | FATT | S. Su 15/40 Protection of health of healthy individual is very important. srafaeitad | S. Su 15/41 Equilibrium state of dosa, agni, dhatu, mala and their ac- tivities are normal along with proper co-ordination between soul, Sense organs and mind in called svastha. argent 8 ai dafqeeds wit fat: a defgraaaa: ts. Su 35/5-6 Whose joints, vessels and ligaments are properly devel- oped with steady sense faculties and all body organs are excel- lent from feet to head and are better than its preceeding is said to survive for longer period. Vyadhiksamatva 305 Person who is free from disorders even from foetal life and gradually developing day by day with common and scien- tific knowledge lives longer. Treg feet ot a GAT aed varet aed upmf aa: qe S. Su 45/26 Collected rain water in a clean vessel mitigates all three dosas, promotes strength, rejuvenative and best for intelligence. Ted asad ad tashferners: sta fe qeafeers ait: wert l C. Ni 6/5 Only the living being can enjoy desired fruit of his action. Therefore, one desirous of long life should avoid rash behavior. C. Ni 6/7 Avoiding all-the things one has to protect his body first by using appropriate preventive measures. aR a MA YR | AAAI: 1 at aa aq warawt a freaft C. Ni 6/9 Sukra is the ultimate excellent outcome of food. That’s why one has to preserve it because its diminution leads to de- velopment of many diseases or even death. fers <cafaasit carer stcit faafra: | wre TI aE HET Ghar faearyrany | C. Ni 6/11 Person who is having control over his senses should take wholesome food in proper quantity and in proper time. Other- wise irregular dieting manifest diseases.
Chapter 16 sisitag Sarr (Ojovaha Srotas) ait: vaderg ant senftrerhafr s s.su 13/14-(Cakrapani). Ojas is the essence of saptadhdtu and it is the seat for Strength, og wentatt ence yerdt tear equeont organi araifa 1 S. Su 15/27 (Dathana) Dhatugrahana refers to dh&tuvaha srotas. It is also called ojovaha srotas as stated by Cakrapani. wah: Ree AM: IRATE: GT YERET WET: | A. Hr. Sa 3/63 (Sarvanga Sundara) Ojas is the essence of saptadhatu and it is the mala of sukra., S. S. Pi 5/17 Ojas is the upadhdatu of sukra. sees SIT OYAT HAT HET: | A. S. Sa 6/39 Ojas is the waste product of sukra dhatu. Yet (Root) f& ar STGTEUTET: TATA aT ETT Tee, ait Pad afta | fear fiited sf ue:, Wet sisitagettrg ee feorafirered: S. Su 15/27 (Cakrapani) The seat of ojovaha srotas is hrdaya along with blood vessels attached to it. a Rea mee waT aT aivtag: oo wittsfer, fared wea: | C. Su 30/8 Ojovaha Srotas 307 10 vessels attached to the heart which carry ojas & pul- sate all over body. Ter Une STAN Ht: | WT Aer: Bits: GRY st: 1 A. Hr. Su 11/37-38 During the process of paka two things are observed i.e. — mala and sara. Mala is the malarupi ojas & sara is the garbha. (atere:) at 9 a Awad cares, wat C. Su 17/73-74 (Gangdadhara) © If astabindu quantity ojas (para ojas) decreases then person will die. ; e@ On the contrary if ardhafjali (apara ojas) ojas decreases or vitiated manifest 3 kinds of abnormalities i.e. ojahksaya, ojo vyapat and ojovisramsa. But person may die due to ardhanjali ojoksaya also. aisles aid afe Ra (Ojovaha Srotodusti Hetu) ’ Hetu—etiological factors afar areaaeemrragargye: sitet: tattad grat erent: gay | ta: wife wonigeaata afer: 1s. su 15/23 Ojas undergoes decrease due to injury, tissue depletion (dhatuksaya), anger, grief, worry, exertion, hunger etc. result- ing into the flowing out from the dhatus and getting associated with tejas and instigated by vata, which gives various discom- fort to the body. ; Astanga Sangrahakara also mentioned same etiological factors. A. S. Su 19/32-33 aisitag art afe MAW (Ojovaha Srotodusti Laksana) Three kinds of Ojodosa manifests are as follows—
308 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana wea feetat core ata sft wat ater: | S. Su 15/24 Ojodosa i.e. abnormalities in ojas is of 3 kinds i) Ojo visramsa ii) Ojo vyapat and iii) Ojahksaya. stent freer (Ojo Visramsa) fereta: eorareegfercfrearnfefia tas. su 15/24 (Dalhana) Visramsa means displacement from its normal place. wher faretet sient wert te exert feverafertieres free 1 S. Su 15/24 Clinical features due to oja visrarisa are as follows— e Looseness of the joints. Weakness of the body. Displacement of the dosas from their respective seats. Impairment in activities or sluggish behaviour. Bs SAM (Ojo Vyapat) cara area: MH gedlaaer wang | S. Su 15/24 (Dalhana) Vyapat means ojas gets vitiated by dusta dosa and dusya. Reet stage aultea tenkrara fear a carat 1 S. Su 15/24 General symeptomatology due to ojo vyapat are as follows— Stiffness and heaviness in body. Swelling due to vata. Discolouration or loss of complexion. Exhaustion e Stupor e Excess sleep sititara (Clinical Features of Ojahksaya) a: TAO | Decrease in its quantity. S. Su 15/24 (Dalhana) Ojovaha Srotas 309 eal area age shes seme areor fafa er age S. Su 15/24 e Fainting e Wasting of muscles e Unconsciousness e Delirium e Death fatter adeits cet carafe cafeataa: goer gia Sa: amyaara: aa | C. Su 17/73; A. S. Su 19/32-33 Fear complex develops or full of fear General weakness e Worry Discomfort in sense organs Loss of complexion e@ Unstable mind Roughness e Emaciation asitsitahs MAT (Ojo Vrddhi Laksana) aiet at fe teen qfiafe acitea: | A. S. Su 19/34 Increased ojas is responsible for unique growth, nourish- ment and promotes strength. aria Sart als faa (Ojovaha Srotodusti Vikara) Role of Ojas in the Genesis of Various Disorders seeeee waft-arattreangédisraraaa | S. Ut 39/41 Abhinydsa jvara is also called hataujasa jvara by others. Due to loss or decrease of ojas, this condition is stated to diffi- cult to cure, Ojo Nirodhaja Jvara aint fasadt aca firatreraqesar. a Taser yee aa: | ae FE Tar AY Arse Weary | dexter 80s wrest ?weeraaaes: | atet Protest aca sitar geet fare t wert faa wet aA gregistt ar
310 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana weet ger went aft ea aris. Un 39/43-46 Ojonirodhaja jvara manifest due to depletion of ojas by aggravated pitta and vata. ‘ Clinical features. © Stiffness all.over the body Coldness Desire to sleep always Unconsciousness Disturbed sleep (i.e. sleep for a while followed by awak ening oftenly). Stupor Delirium Horripilations Debility Mild increase of temperature and discomfort. Time Period for Pacification or Kill Symptoms greatly aggravated on seventh day, tenth day and 12" day or symptoms may subside on seventh day, tenth day and 12" day. ¥iG (Sosa) Sena VT... S. Utt 41/4 In case of Sosa roga there will be severe dryness or ex- treme depletion of tissues leading to loss of ojas. Weat (Mircha) ceeeseee GRINS TTA Tt S. Utt 46/5 Unconsciousness, loss of strength are the purvarupa ob- served in murchd. Sat (Jvara) THe, GAPATHESU TAT: - C. CE B/345 Ojovaba Srotas 311 Jvara is the king of all diseases. It causes death to all crea- tures on earth and which is seriously afflicting individual. wae (Prameha) mer waesaigheak trata: aited, Tega sea fe fated asia ar vafa, wae ¢ sist: aa sihaeta ataq | C.Su 30/6-7 (Cakrapani) In case of prameha, apara or ardhajfijali ojas is involved and not the para ojas because even slight reduction of para ojas leads to death. In madhumeha, inspite of reduction of ojas i.e. a@para ojas person still survives. WUE (Pardu) . Wat aut eet Flat BF ase YUM: 1. Ci: 16/5-6 Due to excessive excacerbation of three dosas espescially pitta afflicts dhatus as a result complextion, strength, unctousness and ojas get exceedingly reduced leading to de- velopment of pandu roga. IAA (Rajayaksma) acivatt dq ura: aead fee 1 wer de tet. fasennrafimn: | C. Ci. 8/41-42 Disturbed functions of agni leads to manifestation of kitta (waste substance) in excess as a result ojas diminishes. That’s why mala has to be protected to support the body. SCMIGIMa (Udanavrta Prana) SEAM BY. I C. Ci. 28/208 Loss of activities, oja, bala and complexion is observed in udanavrta prana.
312 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana aa faa (Bala Visramsa) Some people says that bala having three kinds of abnormalities. wet ater acre saaieertarn: | S. Su 15/25 Bala abnormalities is of 3 kinds namely bala vyapat, bala visramsa and balaksaya. aorgd frat =a aeifeea | ary S. Su 15/26 Symptoms observed due to. bala visramsa are as follows— e Looseness of joints Debility Displacement of three dosdas Fatigue Impaired body functions ae SNA (Bala Vyapat) Ted owermssy vente = Ae wat ft areas) = wereaefe | cretor 1 S. Su 15/26-27 Symptoms due to bala vyapat are as follows— Heaviness and stiffness in body Exhaustion Discolouration Stupor Excessive sleep @ Swelling due to vata et 8 (Bala Ksaya) : Weel wivarh de: waits aaa a Yabo a fers ATi BA Tears | : S. Su 15/27 Symptoms due to bala ksaya are as follows— Ojovaha Srotas 313 Fainting Depletion of muscles Unconsciousness Delirium Improper perception of knowledge Death Prognosis of Oja and Bala Abnormalities wa fret area a frenfanin fase; gat ¢ FS wat ata | S. Su 15/28 Ojo visramsa and vyapat are curable by adopting treat- ments which are not opposite. Ojoksaya is incurable entity be- cause it produces due to improper understanding. eecoebre 22 Vik..&Roga
Chapter 17 fel GSI (Nidana Paficaka) crafter mang sarequaha gitr day Perea | M.Ni 1/4 (Madhukosa) The word nidana used in two different contexts i.e. diag- nosis of diseases and etiological factors of the disease. area wiftr (Diagnosis of diseases) Param Pretenfrarahfer M.Ni 1/4 (Madhukosa), S.Su. 3/14 Nidana helps to know about etiology, symptomatology, pathogenesis. Prigvad cqercita fram | M.Ni 1/4 (Madhukosa) Which gives complete knowledge about vyddhi is called nidana. Pra dea ouforet safes erm M.Ni 1/4. (Madhukosa) It is the method by which disease is diagnosed is called nidana. catia arot Perr | M.Ni 1/4 (Madhukosa) It is the process by which disease can be diagnosed is.called nidana. fet 0 fraeat ss Meenfeeeat «= afer M.Ni 1/4 (Madhukosa) Which gives knowledge about etiology, symptomatology, pathogenesis is called nidana. wT | fer wrquevaquitayrenftafa: | A.Hr. Su 1/22 Roga should be examined by nidana (etiology), pragripa Nidana Pajicaka 315 (premonitory symptoms), Jaksana (symptomatology), upasaya (trial and error therapeutics), Gpti (pathogenesis). Wa Sarda Wt: | Meoerabara yeheMagrraeftah: 11 A.S. Ni 1/6 . One which produces pain is called roga. This can be ex- amined by nidana, pururupa, rupa, upaSaya and samprapti. votes fami wot we emi A.Hr. Ni 1/2 Niddnaa, purvarupa, rupa, upasaya and samprapti are the five means of diagnosis. aa fer WaT Pert year | ferafart: 11 fagiasra arena Ni. 1/2 (Gangadhara) The word niddna in respect to diagnosis includes nidana, - Purvarupa, linga, upasaya and samprapti. at: AR entero fea dereferr 1) C.Ni. 1/5 (Cakrapani) Five means of diagnosis helps for the diagnosis of dis- eases. IW (Etiological factors) sarregafa tq fer 1i M.Ni 1/2 (Madhukosa) Factors which manifest disease is called nidana. wa Pert araig wate: | oer gaefemer frerear 11 ' A.S. Ni 1/7 Nidana means one which aggravates vatadi dosds. It may be due to intake of incompatible dietetics and improper activi- ties. : w fet aro fae WAIL CNL7
316 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfidna It describes causative factors of the disease. Sfraderret titres *affarris M.Ni 1/4 (Madhukosa) A factor which is capable of manifesting the develop- ment of disease either quickly or after a certain period is called hetu. fier wafa (Synonyms of Nidina) A.S. Ni 1/7 Hetu, nimitta, Gyatana, karaka, karta, kdrana, pratyaya, samutthanam, mitlam, yoni are the synonyms of niddna. Hetu- It performs multidimensional actions in the initia- tion of disease process by aggravating vatadi dosas. Nimitta— Certains signs manifested in the body, act as caus- ative factors for the disease. Ayatana- It indicates the place of origin of disease. For example: Jangala dega is predominant of vata and favours the mani- festation of vatavyddhi. Karaka— Disease producing agent. Karta— Main culprit to bring inequilibrium state of dosds, dusyas etc for the production of disease. Karana- The factors which disturbs the normal physiologi- cal functions and capable of manifesting disease are called KGrana. Pratyaya~ It means faith in certain objects. Person may not be knowing that ‘these faithful objects may act as a disease causative agent due to blasphemy. Intake of unwholesome food unknowingly is called pratyaya. Nida’na Paficaka 317 Samutthana— \x is main fundamental factor for initiation of disease process and it originates certain factors i.e. samutthana. : Miula-tit is the root cause for the initiation of vyadhi. Yoni— Without nidana disease can’t manifest that’s why it is called as source for vyadhi. aa aa (Classification of Hetu) Four types of Hetu Tas fara cafirentt urenfres aeragel | M.Ni 1/5 1. Sannikrsta Hetu 2. Viprakrsta Hetu 3. Vyabhicari Hetu 4. Pradhanika Hetu Three types of Ayatana aearecntfat- saat actor: aarerer enfant: 11 C.Su. 11/37 fafeet a, areredtaenst cater waracre afore arg 1 M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Asdtmyendriyartha Samvoga (Arthanam) 2. Prajnaparadha (Karmana) _3. Parinama (Kala) Three types of Hetu am cmequa @q era a fifaa: 1 M.Ni I/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Dosa Hetu 2. Vyadhi Hetu 3. Ubhaya Hetu
318 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Two types of Hetu a UWieres we Gard feet M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Utpadaka Hetu 2. Vyatijaka Hetu Two types of Hetu aeaat «fart fear M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Bahya Hetu 2. Abhyantara Hetu Hetu is divided into two kinds a oaiasf onpfte: owmennfe aaeiawar M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Prakrta Hetu 2. Vaikrta Hetu Two types of Hetu agers Feret feet M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Anubandhya 2. Anubandha Two types of Hetu wafafagirdt aa t M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukoga) lL. Prakrti 2. Vikrti Three types of Hetu wt We-a-akes eet fafaer afi: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Ksaya 2. Sthéna 3. Vrddhi Nidana_ Paficaka 319 — Three types of Hetu ne aes fre a fara fafae amt M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Urdhvaga 2. Adhasca 3. Tiryak Three types of Hetu , ‘fafaer ued ars grearifteratey 1 M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Kostha 2. Sakha 3. Marmasthi Sandhisu Asayapakarsa Hetu wpa Be I Two types of Hetu Ue BSS: SPRATT FIAT: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Sama Hetu 2. Nirama Hetu ane aq (Sannikrsta Hetu) ay wentacr @aa:, 7 a dae nderd M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Cause which is near for the prakopa of the dosas. For ex- . ample. e Diurnal variation of dosds takes place routinely i.e. during night, day and during digestion. For this sancaya of dosas is not essential Manifests naturally “water gent tsameaen: wT! A.Hr, Ni 1/8
320 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfidna Aggravation of dosds as per age, day, night, during diges- tion is common and it is a physiological process. Children 3 A.M. to 7 P.M.} 10 A.M.-3 P.M. ] 6-10 A.M. 2-6 A.M. 11-2 A.M. 7-11 P.M. Bhuktanam| At the end of During the During early digestion . middle stage process of of digestion digestion fear «fest weer safe aan M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Ruksddi bhojana and vihara manifest jvara. faras eq (Viprakrsta Hetu) faxpet cen drt Fife: veto aed ae TT HT | feat faveet wareala: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) e It is the distant cause for the production of disease. Sancaya (accumulation) of dosas is very much essential. It is also accepted that jvara manifest due to wrath of god Rudra. : e@ Caya and prakopa of dosds as per séasons depicted below. | Caya | Prakopa Hemanta rtu Varsa rtu Grsma rtu Vasanta rtu Sarad rtu Varsa rtu e Accumulated kapha in hemantha rtu manifests kaphaja vikara in vasanta rtu. e Accumulated pitta in varsa rtu manifests pittaja vikara in §arad rtu. Nidana Pajficaka 321 e Accumulated vata in grsma rtu manifests vataja vikara in varsa rtu. safirantt 8g (Vyabhicari Hetu) cafe wer at aera caftrencoren: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Cause which is weak and unable to produce the disease but act as a carrier when favorable situation arises for the manifestation of diseases. Due to certain factors, even unwhole- some food does not produce diseases immediately. All unwhole- some food substances are not equally competent to produce the diseases and also all dosa@s and bodies are capable of resist- ing diseases. Unwholesome food may be more harmful depend- ing on the nature of locality, time, combination, potency and quality. When they get favorable environment then only they produces diseases. C.Su. 28/7 3e ae fram ate ger fersraeat farenre feenaerererer sfaferster watt 1 aa Ba wat Prarafe faster: weet ARTA HTT waralenctaiets aargaeahe 4 var faarathtdte:, frrascatatrdrt wrat at eae Telferpren; feacrede ferattat:; gfe etfereare ferarroren are ufsfasrntitdta tara: C.Ni 4/4 Certain factors decides the body immunity or manifesta- tion of disease i.e. etiological factors, dosas and dusyas. If equi- librium state of and dosa, nidana, disya disturbed or when they do not support cach other or when they are weak due to tempo- ral factors, as a result disease may not manifest or there is a delay in manifestation or manifested disease is mild or symptomatology of the disease are not properly expressed. When the etiological factors, dosas, dusyas are favourable moderately or strongly with each other then result may be op- posite i.e. manifested disease will be simple, immediately mani- fested or all the symptomatology of the disease might be ex- pressed completely.
322 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana So specific factors which determines the ability or resist- ing capacity of the individual in the production of diseases. wraiha (Pradhanika) wentrat aor faare: 1 M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) e It is the powerful cause which produce diseases instan- taneously like poison. e Sudden manifestation of the symptoms are seen. e Accumulation of dosds is not neccessary. e Agantuja (external causes) may be included under pradhanika hetu. fafaa ag (Three fold etiological factors) sreataenel aaht (stata) [Asa@tmyendriyartha Sariyoga (Arthanam)] Excessive utilization or non utilization or improper utili- zation of sense objects is called asatmyendriyartha samyoga. C.Su. 11/37 Tis aaUyrny Vasakaaaact Racrenecarrenest WavT: | C.Su. 11/38 The objects of sense faculties ig of five types and further subdivided each into three, so totally 15 varieties of unwhole some conjunction of sense organ observed and it is the root cause for the manifestation of diseases. wagfttae srereattzened citer 1 (Cakgurindriya asdtmyendriyartha sariyoga). waithsa atfratt (Caksurindriya Atiyoga) werfenrererat qrarnratenst aprraftrein: | Excessive gazing at highly illuminous substance. Nidana Paficaka 323 waite arent ( Caksurindriya Ayoga) weasitsagit want | C.Su. 11/37 Not at all seeing any objects is called non utilization of vision. . wafttea frst (Caksurindriya Mithyayoga) afaemiafarratietrargiee I dive fana faareeniqgsa agit fread: 11 C.Su. 11/37 e Improper utilization of vision like seeing. things which are too close or too faraway. e Things which are looking terrible or awful or surpris- ing or deformed or contemptuous or frightful or alarm- ing etc. gantkaa akan (Sravanendriya Atiyoga) aUrsfaarreahaaze HS Vrerrafaast seorseraet: | : C.Su. 11/37 Hearing uproarious noise from thunder bolt, kettle drum, Joud cries etc. grautira stant (, Sravanendriya Ayoga) PANS ATTA: | C.Su. 11/37 Not at all hearing is the non utilization of hearing organ. sanitea favarart (Sravanendriya Mithyayoga) Getefeargiaend werureditarnfe ye saut french: 1 C.Su. 11/37 ° Hearing of harsh words ; e Hearing news about death of close relatives : © Hearing, assaulting, insulting, frightful and terrifying sounds
324 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfana & Roga Vijfiana mitre sift (Ghranendriya Atiyoga) wersttitentnfrenteat warmest wore: | C.Su. 11/37 ‘oxi Excessive exposure to exceedingly sharp, intense and in- ° ~ xicating odours are comes under ghranendriya atiyoga. HMPA BaP (Ghranendriya Ayoga) wegitsHorritn: | Not at all smelling is non utilization. BM Gxe feat (Ghranendriya Mithyayoga) Brot freer: | C.Su. 11/37 Excessive abnormal exposure to smell of exceedingly pu- trid, unpleasant, i » Impure, decomposed, poison ous gas - erous odour etc. P Bass eaday Tea aiferatet (, Rasanendriya Atiyoga) Tarmenaratrann: aar st C.Su. 11/37 Excessive consumption of various taste foods constitute over usage of gustatory sense organ : Taree ara (Rasanendriya Ayoga) Ways AAT: | Not at all consuming foods is the non utili tory sense organs. TRF frearint (Rasaendriya Mithyayoga) faearahtt ufsasferrere ferfiz favtorrrtqadent 11 C.Su. 11/37 The person who doesn’t follow eating rules as described under asta vidha Gharavisesayatana except ragsi. (C.Vi 1/21) i called rasanendriya mithyayoga. , ys C.Su. 11/37 C.Su. 11/37 Zation of gusta- Nidana_ Paficaka 325 wrraa arfereiet (SparsSanendriya Atiyoga) aens feet . ; ai argent: | C.Su. 11/37 Excessive exposure to cold, hot, bath, massage etc. lead- ing to excessive utilisation of tactile sense objects. wayPrea arent (SparSanendriya Ayoga) wasns Aa: | C.Su. 11/37 Not at all using tactile sense objects is non utilisation. warfaa faa (Sparsanendriya Mithyayoga) art vikttordiat a wearerrgqaiadeat feerrears- faorngfa qq dernigaata fear: 1 C.Su. 11/37 Perverted use of bath, unction, massage, cold and hot sub- stances without following the prescribed order. For example taking cold bath followed by hot bath, immediately one should not apply unction after taking bath etc. Touching uneven sur- face, injury, dirty objects, micro organisms (contact with evil spirits 7). : Importance of Sparsanendriya we wehfifzanfitsa cr, Va: aaa, cay- etenvaatt a aa:, AML Taxa carrererstenal at arafersre: ; isqusran, wares fatateiracdt vacates: 11 C.Su. 11/38 Among five sense organs, touch alone pervades all the sense organs which is firmly associated inherently with mind and mind pervades the tactile object along with other sense or- gans. So the condition of all the sense organs produced by the over all tactile sensation, because of being harmful is known as unwhole some conjuction of sense organs. Each five sense or- gans is subdivided into three varieties based on their excessive utilisation, non utilisation and improper utilisation of sense ob-
326 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana jects is called unwholesome conjunction of sense organs. On the contrary wholesome conjuction with sense organs is called saimya and develops favourable reaction in sense organs. WAIT (Prajiaparadha) Prajndparadha means wrong utilisation of speech, body and mind. Some says even sinful acts also responsible for intel- lectual blasphemy. at oqem: wk wafi: wa oat oenthtfavafadaat: 11 Csu. 11/39 Actions related to speech, mind and body are discussed under intellectual blasphemy. Excess usage of speech, mind and physical activity constitutes over utilisation of these ob- jects. | adgiswafrcaet: | C.Su. 11/39 Not at all using speech, mind and physical activities con- stitutes non utilisation of these objects. WRI frente (Sarira Mithyayoga) C.Su. 11/39 Improper utilisation of body activities like suppression of natural urges, forceful urges, unbalanced slipping, falling and pos- holding breath forcefully, doing heavy physical exercises. are fava: (Vak Mithydyoga) Wrarninracehaaa gran wee sens ateeaitt: I _ C.Su. 11/39 Improper utilisation of speech like back biting, lying, un- timely spéech, quarrel, unpleasant utterance, irrelevant, unfavourable talks, harsh words. ture; vitiation of body, fighting, pressing (excessive massage), Nidana Pajficaka 327 ama faearit (Manasa Mithyadyoga) savies HA TN Ate Aa freragafeathren fear: | C.Su. 11/39 Improper use of mind like fear, grief, anger, greed, confu- sion, conceit, envy and mis-conceptions. tale (Kala) ware: UA: uftona seat | Kala is known as transforming or consequence. sitter? mer: gaaaiioasl: daet:, W Hit: | C.Su. 11/42 Kala is the unit of time comprises of hemanta rtu, grisma rtu, and varsa rtu characterised by cold, hot and rainfall re- spectively. aprlet afaant (Kala Atiyoga) Waa TAS: Tet: SaTeTATaNT C.Su. 11/42 Excessive manifestation of characters in subsequent rtu is called kalatiyoga. For example : Extreme cold in winter. SRT: (Kala Ayoga) Lesser manifestation or not at all manifestation of charac- ters of subsequent rtus is called kala ayoga. C.Su. 4/42 C.Su. 11/42 For example : No rainfall in rainy season. waret faeatam (Kala Mithyayoga) eT Tame ATOTET TET: HTT PALATE: C.Su. 11/42 Improper manifestation of characters in respective seas- ons.
328 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana For example : No rainfall in rainy season but there will be extreme winter. wokafafafaaco gaat faanmti Csu. 11/42 Unwholesome, conjuction of sense organs with their ob- jects, intellectual blasphemy and transformation (time) are the main three etiological factors for the genesis of disorders. Three Subtypes of Hetu . auenquag sera ai fifa: 1 M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) e Dosa Hetu : e@ Vyadhi Hetu e@ Ubhaya Hetu ate 29 (Dosa Hetu) ate gaat aan wa center wert ffir cere we: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Normal accumulation, aggravation and pacification of dosas takes place in respective.seasons is called dosa hetu. wafer 8a (Vyadhi Hetu) enfeetel ae Taal UUETh HOTT | aerftr weft ae wena 11 M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Vyadhi hetus are those which are responsible for the de- velopment of specific disease by specific etiology. For example : . Regular consumption of mrd manifest mrdbhaksanajanya pandu roga. afrerersiieet «= qearaqerit «Her: 1 warn Ared, firqea, ua way I C.Ci 16/27-28 Nidana Paficaka 329 Continuous intake of mrd aggravates vatddi three dosas. Depending on the dominancy of particular taste in mrd pro- duces following diseases. Causative agent Kasaya dominated mrd (Astringent taste mud) Usara dominated mrd (Alkaline saline taste mud) Madhura dominated mrd (Sweet taste mud) eran anettrt AAT I C.Su. 25/40 Intake of kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) in excess manifest amlapitta vikara. Trat: Versaftrr SHAR | C.Su. 25/40 Consumption of masa (Phaseolus radiatus) in excess mani- fest Slegmapitta vikara. Vata prakopajanya mrdbhaksanajanya pandu Pitta prakopajanya mrdbhaksanajanya pandu Kapha prakopajanya mrdbhaksanajanya pandu Excess intake of kalaya manifest kalaya khaftja vyadhi. : : S.Ni. 1/78 Ubhaya Hetu seen aT | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Specific factors which aggravates vata and rakta and si- multaneously manifest vatarakta vyadhi. Here causative fac- tors aggravates dosas and simultaneously manifest diseases. Two Types of Hetu Budhana Yared feet | = M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 1. Utpadaka Hetu : 2. Vyanjaka Hetu 1. Sua 2a (Utpadaka Hetu) aaiaresnt aon Para HAL TH: RET | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) 23Vik. & Roga
330 Ayurvedtya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiina Utpadaka hetu’s are those which favours accumulation of respective dosds in respective season due to changes in season. For example : In hemant rtu due to madhuradi substances accumulation of kapha observed. 2. HH BT (Vyaiijaka Hetu) wae TAT Tela BH AA TIT FATT: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Vyanjaka hetu’s are those which stimulate the develop- ment of diseases. For example : Accumulated kapha in hemanta manifest disorders of kapha in vasanta due to effect of sun. Iwo Types of Hetu qrarerat tere fea | 1. Bahya Hetu 2. Abhyantara Hetu 1. ta VA (Bahya Hetu) WA AT AERA Hienea: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Diseases manifest due to consumpxion of various abnor- mal diet, activities, effects of season and such other internal factors which are responsible for the development of disease are called bahya hetu. M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Vatadi dosa prakopaka hetu’s are included under bahya hetu. 2. SIAM BE (Abhyantara Hetu) STREP AAT STAT FEN | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Internal factors which disturbs the dosa and dusya’s are called Gbhyantara hetu. Two types of Hetu wa, shatsfi vette: wraetercteren | M.Ni 1/5’ (Madhukosa) Nidana_ Pajficaka 331 1. Prakrta Hetu 2. Vaikrta Hetu 1. Wed 8 (Prakrta Hetu) Wet aant aet yeran, yet fost, wate ara: | M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Prakrta hetu’s are those which manifest naturally due to variation in seasons and accordingly aggravation of dosds re- sults. For example : Kapha prakopa in vasanta rtu Pitta prakopa in Sarad rtu Vata prakopa in varsa rtu 2. Apa WI (Vaikrta Hetu) ae wn ard fir anal, ang ae fit a, yrfe amt agar) M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Vaikrta hetu’s are those which manifest due to abnormal seasons. , For example: In vasanta rtu — pitta and vayu prakopa In varsa rtu — kapha — pitta prakopa In Sarad rtu ~ Kapha -— Vata Prakopa Understanding of normal and abnormal aggravation of dos@s as per influence of rtu is essential to understand the prog- nosis of disease. Two Types of Hetu TITAN THS Haret (RAT | 1. Anubandhya Hetu 2. Anubandha Hetu 1. AYIA Fc (Anubandhya Hetu) SYRAA: WIAA | , M.Ni 175 (Madhukosa) M.Ni IS. (Madhukosa)
332 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana It is the prime cause. : 2. ATI aI (Anubandha Hetu) FATS TATA | It is the secondary cause M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa) Two Types of Hetu weptatecpfercit aa | 1. Prakrti Hetu 2. Vikrti Hetu 1. Wepfa Ba (Prakrti Hetu) anitad a firth; weer: | (tare) Kapha and pitta roga’s are easily curable in vata ' prakrti person provided if those diseases comes under curable category. 2. fafa tq (Vikpti Hetu) _ aid wend arth: Heer wafer | Mi 1/5 (Madhukosa) Vata roga's are difficult to cure in vataja prakrti persons. Pitta roga’s are difficult to cure in pitta prakrti persons and same applies to kapha prakrti person also. amprarmard a (Asayapakarsa Hetu) STAT AMN- Tal pees AF TATPTATATH ET ATT: wort werafe dar canes fa a faenrt sat | M. Ni I/5 (Madhukosa) ASayapakarsa means normal equilibrium condition of dosas moves from their own p!ace by the influence of vata and produces diseases. M.Ni 1/5 (Madhukosa} For example: If normal dosa moves to different places other than its normal path and their it becomes the abnormal one be- cause that place is not conducive to that particular dosa and produces twelve alternant conditions of dosés depending on Nidana Paficaka their aggravation & diminution together. warner omy at aa faedfri wat Weg aes at aarafee: | Tet waa st ddema ai spire ae arg: aftot feet aat weit | asus dat ae: yet areata 1 vert fe ai fat aar araftara | Teena pal wrarika. waz 11 weet fe gat yee firs aftat atory | ware wedia vith wa sri wim ofteittt am: fet warn wpdta afer yale ferieqis fst wat wert @ geht ceria ward a diet stat afr: 11 dearer gq ween firaa ufeasey aterm det wha qa free a ae aera 1! Gafrrea go veren | Arechitueifed: | erg vet a dé a waaerafeen 1 Tima = agarmtdetret = WaT Tada a Ward wWauesaa 1 Treg ah eh fiat a pied we! etift aft fei gota aera: it 333
334 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana crafted veer « Alateafireereyery | Senne yest a array a af fe 11 aragetorart far Slat: PATER | C. Su. 17/45-61 1. When the kapha is in the state of diminution, the aggra- vated vata catries the normal state of pitta to different places and produces symptoms like cracking, burning sensation ex- haustion and weakness all over the body. 2. When pitta is their in the state of diminution, the aggra- vated vata carries the equilibrium kapha to different places and manifest symptoms like pain, coolness, stiffness and heavi- ness. 3. When kapha is their in the state of diminution, if vata gets obstruction from normal pitta then it produces burning sen- sation and pain. 4. When vata is their in the state of diminution and pitta present in equilibrium state brings obstruction in the path of kapha and manifest drowsiness, heaviness & fever. 5. When pitta is their-in the state of diminution, if vata gets obstruction by aggravated vata then it manifest coolness, heaviness and pain. 6. When v4@ta is their in the state of diminution, if kapha obstructs the normal pitta and produces mildness in digestive power, stiffness in head, excessive sleep, drowsiness, delirium heart discases, heaviness in the body, yellowishness of the nails, along with expectoration of kapha and pitta. 7. When vata is their in the state of diminution, if kapha moves along with pitta and produces anorexia, indigestion, Nidana Paficaka 335 general malaize, heaviness, nausea, salivation, pallor, burning sensation, intoxication, irregularities in purgation and diges- tion. 8. When pitta is their in the.state of diminution, if kapha combines with vata and manifest symptoms like unstable stiff- ness, cold, pain, heaviness, mild digestive power, dislike for food, trembling, pallor in nails and roughness in entire body. 9. When kapha is their in the state of diminution, if aggra- vated vata and pitta combines and produces giddiness, pain, cramps, burning & cracking sensation, trembling, dryness, in- creased warmthness and steaming sensation. 10. When vata & pitta are in the state of diminution, if kapha obstructs the channels and manifest sluggish or loss of activity, fainting and loss of speech. 11. When vata & kapha are in the state of diminution, if pitta eliminates ojas from the body & causes depression, weak- ness in sense organs, thirst, fainting and loss of action. 12. When pitta and kapha are in the state of diminution, vata afflicts the vital organs very badly, loss of consciousness and trembling. Classification of Hetu According ta Author fava Hee (Improper Dietetics) faeafaer (Abnormal Activ: ties) sata St (improper Administration of Therapies) SMI (Exogenous) Rpefort aaa (Defect in Sperms and Ovum) HPT (infective Agents) 7. SE (Unseen Factors) 8. WuhreeHt (Developed by others) 9. way (Epidemic Cause) 10. Aq a4 (Depletion of Dhatu’s) 11. AMMaCT (Obstruction in normal pathway) Anh WN =
336 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 12. AH (Contagious) 1. feat sex (improper Dietetics) ata 1 sere tera ety wet AAT: | faeg oa oot serie fem . . A.S.Su 9/7 Those substances, which cause the increase of dosds but doesn’t eliminate them from body is known as viruddha and they are not conducive to dhdtus. Person who doesn’t follow the governing rules of dietetics is called mithya Ghara except rasi. i.e. astavidha Ghara visesayatana. feemleriene famirqer aan astacregierditaa fereargns 1 palfasanert STRAT Teles Meet farwareer aq | A.S.Su 9/11 ; For example : usage of incompatible foods will manifest boils, swelling, toxicity, abscess, tumours of abdomen, tuber- culosis, loss of vigour, strength, memory, sense perceptions and intellect. It is also responsible for eight major incurable disor- ders and kill the person like poison. Example : 1. Certain food substances and medicines naturally heavy for digestion, in such circumstances more food should not be consumed by the person. On the contrary light food may be taken in excess because these are easily digestable. 2. Combination of two or more substances in different pro- portions causes harmful effects to the body. : For. example : equal quantity of madhu and ghee is harm- ful to the body etc. Other than eight fold measures of dietetic rules some other things are also mentioned in relation to diet i.e. food should be warm, unctuous, proper quantity, consume food after digestion of previous meals. Eat food with concentration, not in a hurry or slow with self confidence. In almost all diseases mithyaahara Nidana Paficaka 337 is one of the major causative factor. 2. favarfeert [Mithya Vihara (Abnormal Activities)] Over utilisation, under utilisation and improper utilisation of body, speech and mind is called mithya vihdra. This has been described in detail under prajfaparadha. For Example : Kasa, hikka and $vésa manifest due to ex- posure to dust, smoke, wind, cold weather etc. Sahasajanya rajayaksma: Rajayaksma manifests in such individuals one who overlook their strength and indulge into faulty activities like weak person fighting with strong person etc. Divasvapna (day sleep) is one of the causative factor for kaphaja vikara. ; : ; Ratri jagarana (awake at night) is one of the causative factors for vataja vyadhi. Exposure to hot substances is the causative agent for pittaja vikdra etc. Under utilisation, over utilisation and improper utilisation of sense organs may also be included under this. 3. wartafigpact (Faulty administration of Therapies) Improper administration of therapies is called prayoga- pariguddhatva. warehgera amt annie sar C.Ni 8/22 (Cakrapani) For example; don’t administer antidiarrhoeal drugs in amatisara otherwise it manifest diseases like accumulation of waste products in excess, pain all over abdomen, distension etc. Administered therapy should subside the disease but should not provoke the manifestation of another disease, it is
338 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijfiina the ideal therapy, contrary to this comes under faulty adminis- tration of therapy. Caraka described in detail in Siddisthana. 4. APE (Exogenous) - Diseases manifest due to exogenous factors is called agantuja hetu. , For example : Agantuja jvara, Ggantuja unmdda etc. 5. UnwMfoRaet (Defect in sperm & ovum) ; Diseases born out of defective sperm and ovum are called sukra Sonita dosaja hetu. For example : Kustha, ara, Sahaja trsna, klaibya. If vata prakrti person sufferin ataj. adhi i it 1 g from vataja is difficult to cure. ya wads ten it 6. Birt (Pathogenic organisms) These are the pathogenetic organisms act as a causative factors for various disorders. For Example : Raktaja krmi_ ~ Manifest kustha Slesmaja krmi ~ Manifest jvara, arocaka, | Chardi, karsya etc. Purisaja krmi ~» Manifest atisara, karéya etc. 7. AG Fs (Unseen factor) These e the agents which are n imite y n hi ar € not seen but defini ly: kill ; For example : In some diseases it is very difficult to iden- tify the cause. This may be considered as unknown etiology. 8. Wafer (Concieved by others) These are the causative agents conceived by others. For example : Facin ; g lot of problems by coll i family members etc. ins rn io pite of leading normal life: Nidana Paficaka 339 The etiological factors may be in the form of physical stress, mental stress and emotional stress by others. 9, WAIEAA (Epidemics) There are certain factors which are common to all indi- viduals i.e. air, water, location and seasons and vitiation of these manifest disease to all the inhabitants of the region is called Janapadadhvamsa. For example : Atisdra, Svasa etc. 10. angart aa (Diminution of tissues) Factors which bring about depletion of dhatu are called dhatuksaya hetu. For example : It is said to be one of the prime etiological factors for vata prakepa and vata is considered to be one of the important factor for the maintenance of health in its normalcy and act as a causative agent for almost all diseases when it be- comes agitated. For example : Vata vyadhi, rajayaksma, ksayaja kasa etc. 11. arifaxat eq (Obstruction for normal path) Normal movement of wind, air, food, water, dosds, tis- sues, waste products etc. takes place in healthy channels. Any blockade in the channels resulting into impairment in the move- ment of wind, air, water, dosds, tissues etc. resulting into de- velopment of various disorders. It is also said to be one of the prime factor for vata prakopa. : 12. ARMAS aa (Contagious Causes) These are the agents responsible for: spreading of diseases by following causes. Pa : e Touching the infected patient. e Inhaling the air of afflicted patient. e Eating together, sleeping together and sitting together with affected person.
340 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana e Using dress, garlands and unguents of the afflicted pa- tient by healthy individuals. For example : Kustha, Krmi. Sosa etc. qeea (Premonitory Symptoms) Synonyms : 201, 3a, ytaty : yeaa onryeafer rari caret: C.Ni 1/8 Appearance of symptoms before the manifestation of ac- tual disease is called purvarupa. Qasr: yefearear | A.Hr.Su 12/60 - Symptoms manifest prior to manifestation of disease is Purvarupa. : C.Ni 1/8 (Gangadhara) ; Manifestation of symptoms before the actual manifesta- tion of disease is called parvarupa. Wa sem: ya aq afaerqemit Aa | C.Ni 1/8 (Cakrapani) It indicates the forthcoming disease is called Purvarupa. wey a wea shaw =o de fayttorafetisa: 1 feqrreraracaareneiai ATMA | A.H.Ni 1/3-4 Pragrupa or purvarupa means which indicates the forth coming diseases but it is very difficult to identify the specific dosa, disya etc. because of their poor manifestation and mild nature and the same was described in Tespective chapters. wh fe Twa agaftar: 1 wa Sfret Sf afaersraha | a a yderediagaaat: | A.H.Ni 1/3-4 (Hemadri) Nidana Paficaka 341 Disease is considered to be king because of their multiple dimensions. It can be divided into three sub headings namely symptoms appear before the manifestation of disease is called purvarupa. Actual manifestation of symptoms is called rupa and manifestations of symptoms after the development of dis- ease is called upadrava. fasequeare = eneateuenecsat TL : A.S.Ni 1/8 Which indicates the forthcoming disease but it doesn’t specify the pathogenic agents like dosa, dusya etc. due to mild nature and poorly manifested features. yehan ta (Classification of Pirvarupa) wea uded fafati-wk olcereaennfag | C.Ni 1/8 (Cakrapani) Piurvarupa is of 2 types One which indicates the forth coming disease but some times symptoms may not be seen or if seen they are poorly manifested with less symptoms. For example : Vata vyadhi, Urahksata fdiaq-aegereeers = nennfemestda | : C.Ni 1/8 (Cakrapani) Second variety of purvarupa manifest after dosa and dusya sammiurchana with prominent symptoms. For example : Jvara purvarupa C.Ci 3/28-29 Laziness, Lachrymation, yawning, heaviness, mental fa- tigue, uncertainty about liking and disliking fire, sun, wind and water; indigestion, anorexia, depletion in strength and complex-
342 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana ion and mild change in conduct are the premonitory signs and symptoms of jvara. wT am watt a areredt aa: | C.Ni 1/8 (Cakrapani) It also indicates incurability or death of the patients as de- scribed under prognosis of disease as well as under arista. fefes ycted ered, ara qed fafreqdeas | C.Ni 1/8 (Gangadhara) Piurvarupa is of 2 types 1. Samanya Pirvarupa (General symptoms) 2. Visista purvarupa (Specific symptoms) , LUT year (Samanya Parvarupa (General symptoms) Here general symptoms of disease manifest beforé the manifestation of disease but doesn’t specify the involvement of dosa. smaistta faavie avet aaaem: armraitt S.Vi 39/25-27 Fatigue, restlessness, abnormal complexion, abnormal taste, lachrymation, etc. are the general premonitory symptoms of jvara. fasts qeeag (Visesa Pirvarupa) . art fe sat arnfest Genes: yeesurtara sae sara 11 C.Ni 1/8 (Cakrapani) Appearance of premonitory symptoms observed specifi- cally by specific dosdas. fagtarg wrested eiong | freeriele: UTTAR | S.Ut 39/27 Specific premonitory symptoms of— e e Vdataja jvara is excess yawning. © Pittaja jvara burning sensation in eyes. Nidana_ Paficaka 343 e Kaphaja jvara dislike for food. SrIeTa aa at vfeeqaeafa Garren: ; T yes Ta: | S.Su 35/18 Anyalaksana means which foretells the future disease and it is called purvarupa. waredatar: get wiaerit waite! ae: gata ues wed agent ii M.Ni 1/5-6 (Madhukosa) SthanasamSraya stage of kriyakala represents purvarupa by manifesting premonitory signs and symptoms of the disease. aa yderag age: faearnrer: | 4" stage of kriyakala manifest premonitory symptoms and Signs. wars ged (Samanya Pirvarupa) a wd a teaqeaapeaacnsdhads wifasanie arian witad, 3g arnfasrrrcante fasta: | M:Ni 1/5-6 (Madhukosa) General purvarupa manifest after the conglomeration of dosa@ with dusyGs as a result it manifest purvarupa of jvaradi vyadhis. But it doesn’t specify the vatadi dosas. eye a year cea we: feraad a nad aga fe! M.Ni 1/S-6 (Madhukosa) It specifies the forth coming disease as jvara, Gtisdra, kustha etc. by manifesting premonitory symptoms of respec- tive disease. Involvement of dosa can be understood by rupa. . M.Ni 1/5-6 (Madhukosa) Specific purvarupa observed in urahksata and vatavyadhi but these are mild.
344 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana wf anf sterata fe ete M.Ni 1/5-6 (Madhukosa) Which indicates the forthcoming disease is called Purvarupa. AY, Bet qeteafesta errata eaenfastaraencui aa uecaft «=o adder nfs ater M.Ni 1/5-6 (Madhukosa) Specific characteristic features of pirvarupa indicates the forthcoming disease signalling the name of the disease. aeikh THtMaeea Gee ator erhtaael St = ast feet wees fe gehst: | at at Si a aq was cee fires fe a wea: | C.Ci 6/54 If the colour of the urine is either yellow or mixed with blood eliminated through the urine without the manifestation of premonitory symptoms and signs of prameha, such patient should not be diagnosed as prameha rogi, on the other hand it may be diagnosed as raktapitta. wea oydetg oadatg = gfear | wet Ut aes ad: aew qaqi fafeafedsas, afr fat we owed | oo wampotg = fareftad tt s.su 39/15-16 During premonitory stage of jvara, simple ghee should be administered to the person who is suffering from vataja Purvarupa but not associated with dma. Mild purgation therapy advised in pittaja purvarupa stage, emesis therapy advocated in kaphaja pirvarupa stage. Sq (Rupa) meyarant gary | C.Ni 1/9 Complete manifestation of symptoms is called linga. ST: THAT AeMAUT AAT AF | C.Ni 1/9 (Gangadhara) Nidana Paficaka 345 It is the fully manifested stage of disease with prominent clinical features is called linga. Femieers wnfterfates ae aterafa afer C.Néi 1/9 (Cakrapani) It is the stage in which complete appearance of specific symptoms of the disease is seen. This stage indicates the vatadi dosds and stages of the disease i.e. ma stage’ or pakva stage or advanced stage of the disease. However, this stage doesn’t in- clude nidana, upasaya and samprapti. ama a cattmfatread fag | C.Ni 1/9 (Cakrapani) Cardinal features of the disease are completely observed. For example— 1. Far wearers fers Gat een: 1 C.Ci 3/31 Cardinal signs and symptoms of the jvara are increased body temperature and mental unpleasureness. 2. wriaesa: uftiafrsaenaeat | C.Ci 5/7 Palpaple rounded mass is called gulma. vata, which is form- less, remains located in the present ailment in a compact form and appears like a solid object is called gulma. 3. Seorvatftarasa dam: aca: | vat: waigeata cat wasaenn: | C.Ci 8/52 e Burning sensation in shoulders and sides of the chest. e Burning sensation in hands and feet e@ Fever 4. PATA: vith: UH S HAsfia: YoraoTTIS werye ET HaTOTy | C.Ci 13/21 e Distension of abdomen e Gurgling noise in abdomen ® Oedema in legs and hands 24 Vik. & Roga
346 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana e Diminished power of agni e Smoothness of chin e Emaciation are the signs and symptoms of udara Wee Sra ard watrafaetteae | Clearcut appearance of symptoms is called rupa. samentaatrata fT | M.Ni 1/7 (Madhukosa) It indicates the specific diseases by manifesting specific symptoms of that diseases is called linga. weed: | M.Ni 1/7 (Madhukosa) Amalgamation of dosa and disya itself is called vyadhi as a result jvarddi diseases manifest by manifesting symptoms like anorexia, heaviness etc. we AT WAH | A.S.Ni 1/9 Definite signs and symptoms of the disease is rupa.. It can be classified into two kinds. C.Ni 1/5 1. HIATT BI (General symptomatology) 2. fase &y (Specific symptomatology) 1. HAT ®T (General symptomatology)— General signs and symptoms of the diseases are called sGmdanya rupa. For example : SR AA TAT (vara samanya laksana) TH WAT Fa (Gulma samanya laksana) 2. fasts BI (Specific symptomatology)— Here specific symptoms and signs of diseases observed. For example : vataja, pittaja jvara symptoms etc. wu wate (Synonyms of Rupa) aa feaprpiictant fag dear ment wafieeratare | C.Ni 1/9 Nidaina Pajicaka 347 Linga, akrti, laksana, cinha, samsthana, vyaiijana and rupa are synonyms to each other. Linga- It indicates general or specific state of dosa’s or stage of the disease by exhibiting certain features. 1, fagaa meet me: canard alad areata fq | C.Ni 1/9 (Gangadhara) Any morbid phenomenon experienced by the patient which is in the form of symptom indicative of disease is called linga. . IL, wan anima araasAAcMBla: | C.Ni 1/9 (Gangadhara) Any manifestation of symptoms consciously experienced by the patient is called akrti. IO. Tea Breadsyats cat: C.Ni 1/9 (Gangadhara) It is an subjective evidence of disease or of patient condi- tion experienced by the patient in the form of symptoms which designate towards disease is called laksana. Iv. faad wraastafa fag 1 C.Ni 1/9 (Gangadhara) Which is an indication of the existence of something and it is perceptable to the examining physician is called cinham. - V. Gestad arads Aa GEM | C.Ni 1/9 (Ganigadhara) © It is an objective finding detected by the physician which indictes disease is called samsthanam. lL. cased FTadsaaft east | C.Ni 1/0 (Gangddhara) It is an manifestation of symptom that is almost univer- _ sally associated with a particular disease is called vyafijana. VIL. Baa BreaMasaat SAT | C.Ni 1/9 (Gangadhara) Appearance of noticeable change in the patient condition indicative of some bodily or mental state is called: rupa.
348 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vifjiidna _ Difference Between Vyadhi and Laksana Which gives displeasure to the body It may manifest as a warning symptoms to protect body against invaded causative agents It is the conglomeration of | It may appear as a single symptoms or combination of symptoms Vyadhi pratyanika cikitsa Hetu linga cikitsaé. advocated advised during vyakta stage} di of kriyakala Vyadhi sGnkarya is condi- tion manifest due to conglo- meration of many diseases Linga sankarya is the state in which combination of symptoms observed in parti- cular diseases. It may be single or many It is independent It is dependent on vyddhi When a symptom itself is a disease it has its own dosa- disya sammurchana Symptoms does not-have its own dosa-disya sammiur- chana i.e. jvara in diseases like grahani, rajayaksma etc. Definition of Certain Words Used Under Rupa sat (Tandra)-Stupor 7 Parnfeta mater qe ar farfestqt = s.$a 4/49 Sense organs. become unable to receptive to their objects, feeling of heaviness in body, yawning, exhaustion, acti: ies Nidana Pajficaka 349 of the person becomes similar to that of a sleeping person, this stage is called tandra. Sat Jhrmbha)-Yawn Uidarnrreeereggey fagars: | a waft aart ai wea sft df 1 5.64450 Swallowing of air through inspiration followed by expel- ling the same via mouth accompanied with tearing in eyes is known as jhrmbha. aretet (Alasya)-Lazyness Garasiratyed S:aeaureiera | WrReel Uae: «0 aeeaeret eat 5.5 4/52 Craving for desirable touch, displeasure to discomfort, lack of enthusiasm to do wok inspite of having energy is known as alasya. era (Klama)—Exhaustion GSA: AA 2s ves: varaafera: 1 ae: @ sia fade sfxere warera: | SSG 4/51 Feeling of exhaustion without any physical work followed by not suffering from dyspnoea is known as klama and it dis- turbs sense perception greatly. BEC (Utklesa)—-Nausea sheen 7 Prkeq startin | ged Ulead urer agente fares 1 8.88 4/53 Consumed food trying to come out but doesn’t come out inspite of stimulation, accompanied with salivation and expec- toration followed by manifesting discomfort in the region of heart is known as utklega.
350 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Tet (Glani)-Fatigue aed AGM Te eaMlget WA: | a arantianga vent wea fatatestq | S.Sa 4/54 Sweetishness in mouth, stupor, ‘twisting sensation in car- diac region, giddiness followed by aversion to food is known as glani. Tia (Gaurava)—Heavyness simantaas oat at met | weaat: | amt oye fertseef wha fees ssa 4/55 ‘Person feels as if his body is covered by moist skin fol- lowed by excessive heaviness in head is called gaurava. Weal (Mircha)-Fainting yeat fem: wrt, ta: ftienfrena wa: 1 Wiacearrs, fer yer adiwati s.$a 4/56 © Murccha manifest due to predominance of pitta and tamoguna e Bhrama manifest due to predominance of raja, pitta and vata e .Tandra manifest due to predominance of tamoguna, vata and kapha e Nidra manifest due to predominance of kapha and: tamoguna STRAT SHAN: | Amliké means sour erucations. uftate: eet ate: 1 S.Su 21/27 (Dalhana) Paridaha means burning sensation in entire body. aaa CNA | S.Su 21/27 (Dalhana) Hrdayotkleda means excessive salivation. sere Gon Yee SaTATT: | S.Su 21/32 (Dalhana) S8.Su 21/27 (Daihana) Nidana_ Pajficaka 7 ON 354 Atopa means painful tympanitis. \ aia weneferent ae: | S.Su 21/32 (Dathana) Osa means burning sensaton in particular area. aia: Yaa ya Aaafagts: 1 S.Su 21/32 (Dalhana) Cosa means piercing type of pain. gare pga | S.Su 21/32 (Dalhana) Dhumayana means emitting smoke from mouth. IAVEH] ACUHSAAIATAGET | S.Su 21/19 (Dalhana) Anagana means less intake of food or fasting. ferent aeTeareAteraerTy S.Su 21/19 (Dathana) Visam@Sana means excess intake of food or less intake of food in improper time... wear arsitet aR | S.Su 21/27 (Dathana ) AdhyaSana means eating during indigestion. Vgenerrra weanisye ae: | QCA Mars WET TEAA | S.Utt 42/81 Sula means patient feels severe pain as if nail is being pierced in. get WHAT Saw Far | It means crushing type of pain. , S.Utt 43/6 (Dalhana) qe qeaa | It means pricking type of pain. M.Ni 29/3 (Madhukosa) enlera area { It means boring type of pain. M.Ni 29/3 (Madhukosa) Urea wong 1 It means sn aming type of pain. M.Ni 29/3 (Madhukosa)
352 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Symptom ; Any morbid phenomenon or departure from the normal function, appearance or sensation, experienced by patient in- dicative of disease. It is a subjective evidence of a disease. a. Accessary symptom-—any symptom not neccessarily characteristic of,patient’s disease. b. Characteristic symptom—a symptom that is almost uni- versally associated with a particular disease or condition. c. Cardinal—a symptom that is primary significance. d. Concomittant—a symptom not essential to a disease, but which may have an accessary value in its diagnosis. . e. Constitutional-a symptom which is indicative of or due to disorder of the whole body. Sign 1. An indication of the existence of something; any objec- tive evidence of a disease,"iJe. such evidence as is perceptable to the examining physician. 2. Any abnormality indicative of disease, discoverable by the physician at his examination of the patient, a sign is an objective symptom of disease. 3. Some signs are deliberately elicited by means of tests for diagnostic purposes Symptomatology—The group of symptom of disease. The study of the symptoms of disease, their causes & information they furnish. Syndrome (Running together)— The aggregate of signs and symptoms associated with any morbid process and consti- tuting together the picture of the disease. : Sara (Explorative Therapy) qareita qa tarrafreary | M.Ni 1/9 (Madhukosa) Nidana Pajficaka . 353 The word pleasure used in context to upasaya means which gives happiness and pacify the disease. Certain things are not included under upaSaya even though they give hap- piness for a short period. For example cold water gives re- lief to thirst.and burning sensation in case of navajvara for a short period but later aggravates the condition. This doesn’t comes under upaSaya. Certain things gives instant pleasure like wearing garlands, application of sandal paste and women but these things are not considered ad upaSsaya. That’s why specifically medicine, food and regimen men- tioned. faerongqaart: Faryas: | C.Ni 1/10 UpaSaya means which gives pleasure to the person by the use of medicine, diets and regimens. Their action may directly against the cause, or to the disease itself or to the both. (i.e. to cause and disease.) ; Fayert oft Qaedisyat: | {TAs Waanwificad: | sass yeas a caret arian cafe 1 C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Upasaya means which. bring about feeling of happiness. Factors which creates environment for happiness are called upasaya. It is also helpful in detecting the cases where diffi- culty arised due to similarities in symptomatology, in such cir- cumstances upagaya helps to diagnose the case accurately. For example : Teta aukrqasreryayrarrat | C.Vi 4/8 In case of difficulty in a diagnosis of disease due to some hidden things or mimicking nature of disease in such circum- stances upasaya and anupasaya therapy helps to diagnose the condition. :
354 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana For example : aaafa a yet wigtonneTenS MOTVaL T at afta: | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Gulma which alleviates by unctuous substances, hot things and massage indicates that person is suffering from vadtaja gulma. eqeatfer farkafaratersianhory | stewart faerronqaant Paraeyz | fangard oma: a fe arefift cra: 1 . A.Hr.Ni 1/6-7 ; Factors like medicines, activities, food gives relief by us- ing them directly against the cause, or to the disease itself or by both is called upagaya and which is conducive to the bodies physiological system. Me AMT ae aaIequyd; areal qayrnel: 1 C.Vi. 1/20 Things which are conducive to body physiology are called satmya and use of such substances brings pleasure is called upasaya. saya Wz (Classification of Upasaya) It can be classified into 18 sub types namely Hetu Viparita Ausadha Hetu Viparita Anna Hetu Viparita Vihara Vyadhi Viparita Ausadha Vyadhi Viparita Anna Vyadhi Viparita Vihara Hetu-Vyddhi Viparita Ausadha Hetu-Vyddhi Viparita Anna Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Vihara 10. Hetu Viparitarthakari Ausadha 11. Hetu Viparitarthakari Anna SerIAWRYN- Nidana Pajicaka 355 12. Hetu Viparitarthakari Vihara 13. Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Ausadha 14. Vya@dhi Viparitarthakari Anna 15. Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Vihara 16. Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Ausadha 17. Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Anna 18. Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Vihara So, Upagaya means getting comfort by the use of medi- cines, food and activities which are either viparita (opposite) or viparitarthakari (producing the opposite effect though not actually opposite) of the etiology of the disease, or disease it- self or both. 1. 2q faatta sitet (Hetu Viparita Ausadha) (Drugs antagonistic to ‘the cause of the disease) Rafacta they, er vicaast Yoougal Aasy | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of Sunthi against Sitakaphajvara due to its hotness. @o a sitene Urea get fare set set Rreea year | C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) _ Hot potency drugs may be employed for the person who is suffering from diseases due to cold effect and vice versa. Draksadi yoga is advised to overcome exhaustion. 2. &q feat at (Hetu Viparita Anna) (Food which is antagonistic to the cause of the disease) Rafaattarst, wer safest sat weed: | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Intake of meat juice in case of vatajvara and fatigue. 3. 2q faarta ferent (Hetu Viparita Vihara) (Regimen antagonistic to the cause of the disease)
356 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiiana Rafer faer:, ser fervent ust sercory | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) _ Remaining awake in night in case of aggravation of kapha due to day sleep. : ferateartarrat aaget asa vat Trot Bet fear farrttery i ofr farere: 1 C.Ni 1/10 (Gangaédhara) Intake of slimy substances followed by day sleep aggra- vates kapha and manifest kaphaja jvara and it can be managed by consumption of rough substances followed by awakening at night. . 4. eet fetta attest (Vyadhi Viparita Ausadha) (Drugs antagonistic to the disease itself) anitiacinieda, aa afaent wert urafk | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Use of antidiarrheal drugs like patha etc in case of atisara. snfefacthrieet aon tenor ange feared ageratie- ae aftent ent arene 1 fee ferfte: | eed |fee: 1 wae efter | qeoneanfeary ays Se C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) Usage of slimy drugs like bhadradaru, devadaru in case of aggravation of vata due to usage of rough substances. e PGatha in Atisara Rogi e Sirisa in Visa Roga © Khadira in Kustha © Haridrad in Prameha © Dasgsakam in Trisna 5. sare feratta aA (Vyadhi Viparita Anna) (Food antagonistic to disease) cafaferitad, gat afert arent ages C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Intake of food which are supporting antidiarrhoeal activ- ity i.e. usage of masura etc. in atisara rogi. Nidana Paficaka 357 warerd Tae | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of slimy substances like ghee against aggravated vata by using rough substances. Masura, yiusa etc. are advised to support antidiarrheal activities in atisara. 6. earet faut faa (Vyadhi Viparita Vihara) (Regimen antagonistic to disease) cafatarict frer:, am saad wareory | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Pravahana (making downward peristalsis) is the treatment for udavarta rogi. anfafaatte free teaort arrest frenFrer 1 C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) Advising day sleep for the person who ‘is suffering from vata vrddhi due to awakening at night. 7.%q sale faatta attest (Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Ausadha) (Drugs antagonistic to cause and disease) C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of dasamila kvatha in-case of vataja Sotha, which subsides vata as well as Sotha. 8.2q eufe faatta 28 (Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Anna) (Food antagonistic to cause and disease) 2a enfafaataad, ae yitesat gen caret wary: | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of hot substances and antipyretic gruel against Sitottha jvara, which subsides cold and fever. 9, a sales feratta ferart (Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Vihara) (Regimen antagonistic to cause and disease)
358 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiina tqenfaferit frer:, aan fare arawral raat Bat wartert UaerRURy | C.Ni 1/10. (Cakrapani) Indulging in activities like awakening in night etc. which brings roughness in case of tandra, which manifest due to in- take of slimy substances followed by day sleep. 10. eq farrttoretantt sitet (Hetu Viparitarthakari Augadha) (Drugs which are working against the causative factors of the disease though not actually against) Vaated, gen firent wens ie ferent sor SUE: | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Application of hot substances in case of Pacyamana Sotha, which aggravates pitta and helps for speedy recovery. ae Mafeteienkt sitet an weenie Wat qe fraciquentia | C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) Usage of vrsya drugs like pippali, Sunthi etc. in case of Sukraksaya due to intake of excess pungent substances. 11. 3q faattenetantt art (etn Viparitarthakari Anna) (Food which are working against the causative factors of the disease though not actually against) Rafauitaeienraks, wer cea Ferrey vite frente ST | . C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of food substances which are hot in case of pacyamana Sotha due to pitta dosa. Raferettarelesreatst aon GereronaTs Yoga Ge: UTOTTELT er: | C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) Intake of dry old wheat as a vrsya in case of Sukraksaya due to consumption of rough and dry substances in excess. 12. qf faut faere (Hetu Viparitarthakari Vihara) (Regimen which are working against causative factors of Nidana Pajficaka 359 the disease though not actually against) tq faction fae: a arene arr C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Inducing fear to the patients who is suffering from varaja unmdada. 13. safe faatretente siteet (Vyaidhi Viparitarthakari Ausadha) (Drugs which are working against the disease though not actually against) enfafaatadariad, aa weal arta Wet Wert C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of emetic drug madana phala in case of chardi (vom- iting) 14. carer faortnefenn® stat (Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Anra) (Food which is working against the disease though not actually against) . anfufaatiaeinres, wae sittant fatears aft N\ C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Intake of milk in case of atisara, which induces purgation. agatees cham: uororea 4 fercoter Gfrent werferene: Gere fara i oN C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) In case of pittaja “Gtigara (who is suffering from severe morbid factors along with enhanced power of agni) milk may be advised which induces purgation. 15. cartes faadtaretentt< feet (Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Vihira) (Regimen which is working against the disease though not actually against) © ; enfirfecttarientt fret aensetate wrearat are TaATEOT | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Inducing vomiting by external support in case of chardi (vomiting)
360 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana anfthattisient feng ace frrakaont fre fara: | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) — Application of unctuous oil followed by day sleep in case of aggravated pitta due to application of unctuous substances. 16. &q Sates farritqietennle sitet (Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Ausadha) (Drug which is working against the cause and disease though not actually against) aqentafanthreiarestigs, gen sft aesqaifent aa: | sor fe) taearnt «ort «0 rget Ss faeafat C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Use of aguru dravya lepa in case of agniplusta dagdha (burn due to fire). Here cause is hot and applied medicine is also hot. sreneaferattereiannht rat aM | werent, frat sree farrecy 1 ways Wretfert ae FAA I C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) e Usage of amla rasa dominant dmlaka to pacify pitta, which aggravated due to consumption of pungent, sour and hot substances. e Mila visa against jangama visa and vice versa. 17. Bq sanler ferrdtarekeny ate (Het Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Anna) (Food which is working against cause and disease though not actually against) arenfefarttnterets, qe reared wares ways AERTS TWeny | C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Usage of intoxicating alcohol against alcoholism induced by consumption of alcohol. Nidana_ Paficaka 361 srafaatnsianttart aan dtenrearancand frerth ae Rarer, aryl C.Ni 1/10 (Gangadhara) Administration of mild unctuous ghee in case of pitta vikara caused due to intake of penetrating and rough substances. . 18, tq eater facrttenefennht faert (Het Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Vihara) \ - (Regimen. which is working against the cause and disease though not actually against) qrenfefaatensiant frert:, aa eramara aayaret ETT COTE STAT: 1 se at re et st aes EIT wien t C.Ni 1/10 (Cakrapani) Swimming therapy advised in the form of exercise in case of vatavyaddhi manifested due to excessive exercise. Here vyayama is the therapy which works against cause and disease. STI (Anupasaya) faathitsqasred emearareccnfirdigqe: | A.Hr.Ni 1/7 Opposite to the description of three upasaya is called anupasaya, which is not conducive to the body. facthits qasra fa sheendtat e-q@ent scans yaya seaek: 1 M.Ni 1/9 (Madhukosa) Medicines, food and regimen which are not conducive to the body and develop displeasure to the body is called anupaSaya. It is also called asatmya. fog fer aeaafa:, dheee Tres at aeencarg | M.Ni 1/9 (Madhukosa) It is not considered as a separate entity under five means of diagnosis due to its similarity with etiology because both anupagsaya and hetu enhances dosas and disease. That’s why anupasaya considered under etiology. 25 Vik. & Roga
362 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfana wottt (Pathogenesis) anger deer ue | -araferatar Patra ventana: 1) ara 179 Process of understanding of development of disease by the vitiated dosa’s which are constantly circulating inside the body. It is also called jati and dgati. ae STRATA START GMTATE: | C.Ni 1/11 (Cakrapani) Factors which finally determines the manifestation of a dis- ease is called samprapti. Teer dean fase enftrarte tnfta: 1 C.Ni 1/11 (Cakrapani) Disease manifest due to specific actions of the dosas and understanding of such events is called Samprapti. arate fe eter gfe: want dad a1, arpereren sare a, weet fay ar aren ar, teenfehe: wdulaeetal, wae gfeger chet a arraee three Fraftrecaht:ar dures | : » M.Ni 1/10 (Madhukosa) Vitiation of dosa takes place in various ways like prakrta, vaikrta, anubandhya, anubandha, ekadosaja, dvidosaja and tridosaja. \t all depends on various etiological factors. Abnor- mal dosas brings abnormality in dhdtus, malas, kalds etc and manifest diseases and understanding of such events is called samprapti. Agitated dosGs circulates either in upper direction, ’ lower direction or both. TeTeafe ardertanfadt ont ser dutta: aq aac waa ) M.Ni 1/10 (Madhukosa) Samprapti means knowing the factors which are respon- sible for the genesis of disease and not only knowing the dis- ease. \ Nidaina Paficaka 363 woita: «yataget diweta Samet 4.s.vi 1/11 How the disease manifested due to imbalanced dosas is called samprapti. torte wate (Synonyms of Samprapti) Toniatfrmiareararer, ware: 1 Samprapti, jati and Ggati are synonymous to each other. ‘ anftrerqatar sifteafahisiatterart | C.Ni. 1/11 (Cakrapani) Jati, Ggati, nivriti and nispatti are synonyms to samprapti. C.Ni. 1/11 Samprapti is described at the end of the nidana pancaka even though symptoms appear after the pathogenesis but knowl- edge of litga (symptom) is more important than samprapti for the diagnosis of the disease. That’s why samprapti described at the end. wort Wa (Classification of Samprapti) mw demmnera fafeifaera aera fasted | C.Ni. 1/11 Sankhya, pradhanya, vidhi, vikalpa, bala, kala are the six types of samprapti. wen anf (Enumeration of Diesease) TST AT- BST SET: WE TEA: Te Hrsratearie: | C.Ni. 1/11 Sankhya Samprapti deals with the subclassification of dis- ease like Y e Jvara is of eight types © Gulma is of five types e Kustha is of seven types e Kasa is of five types etc.
364° Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana mera UM (Degree of Dosic Vitiation) meredt qatar aaereanquera | wl 0omarer:, fr aq siti C.Ni. 1/11 It helps for the identification of dominance of dosdas in case of two or more dosdas are involved. For Example : In case of two.dosa, the word ‘tara’ is used to denote its dominancy in comparison to other dosas. In case of three dosa involvement the word ‘tama’ is used to demonstrate its dominancy with other two dosas. faftrennfta (Variety of Diseases) faftirin- flan arent Forrqaen, Biaenfedte 83, agen: PEAT GETSTT Sq | C.Ni. I/II Vidhi means variety of diseases like two varieties of dis- eases i.e. nija (endogenous) and dgantuja (exogenous); three varieties of dosas based on their vitiation; four varieties of dis- eases based on prognosis of disease i.e. curable, incurable, mild and acute. — Ward arene RET | A.S.Ni 1/12 Pradhanya means it indicates whether the disease is pri- mary or predominant and secondary or associated. facrea tft (Proportional Analysis of Dosa) waaIt Grataromisigrctsaed fencats fara 1 , C.Ni. 1/11 This indicates the proportional analysis of the qualities of the dosdas involved. For example : In case of vata involvement whether samana, vyana, apana,' prana, udana is involved either singly or mix- ing of two or all, such observation can be understood by the knowledge of vikalpa samprapti. Nidana Paficaka 365 Vikalpa sampr4pti also helps to detect the qualitative, quan- titative, functional aggravation of the dosas. Cold vitiates vata quickly than light or rough substances. wet after Strength of Disease) . aeract fast tenfeereaiaaa fer A.S.Ni 1/12 Understanding of the strength of the disease based on caus- ative factors, area of involvement, organ involved, age etc. helps to assess the strength of disease. waret Garter (Time Factors) acrarct fagre: qaeateiangardtarentaner fafetatrarat waq | C.Ni 1/12 This indicates the time of aggravation of dosds in relation to season, various timing of the day, night and intake of food. Kapha jvara in vasanta rtu. kapha jvara aggravates in fore noon and early night, kapha jJvara aggravates just after intake of food. Aggravating and relieving factors of the disease may be understood by this. a Wat (Hetu Sankara) wa tq adacts wa fr: areas atat agit aaisfir = VRMT NNT geet Baeqst: | eetiet wet war udawe | eafasighadat set sanfefirdaq i earehicerts emeaa: ama fr: CNi. 3/24-26 Hetu sankara means conglomeration of hetu in respect to manifestation of diseases. One etiology manifests many diseases, one disease have one etiology, one disease have many etiology, many diseases have many etiologies.
366 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana For example : Intake of rough substances manifest jvara, bhrama, pralapa, some times only fever. Many hetu’s like rough, cold, hot, salt, incompatible dietetic regimen and activi- ties manifestonly fever. But in some people the same etiologi- cal factors may manifest jvara, gulma, raktapitta etc. depend- ing on the vyadhiksamatva of the individual. Prertdat WT (Nidanarthakara Roga) wiafiqer wet wemsit wa a ayia wet ga Yeasmrgqasral | wivaaA Rag ATA:, TATA ANTS aT: | eat treat eget yiteeacgquerent) ci. 8/16-19 Nidanarthakara rog@’s are those where in which one dis- ease serve as a etiology for another disease. For ‘example : e Due to santapa of jvara > Rakta pitta manifest © Rakta pitta and jvara > Manifest Sosa. © Plihabhivrddhi + Develops Udara roga © Jathara Roga—>» Manifest Sotha Argsa Roga become etiology for > Jathara roga and gulma e Prati§yaya develops Kasa + Kasa manifest > Ksaya © Ksaya develops fosa roga. a yd aen thn: asgeredaniiu: | sarang qerastacnretenheat: | C.Ni. 8/20 Initially nidGnarthakara rogés manifest independently as a disease and later serve as a etiological factor for another dis- ease, sometimes they serve both purposes i.e. disease as well Nidana Pajficaka 367 as etiology and sometimes become either etiology or disease, Nidanarthakara roga’s may be divided into two kinds i.e, ekarthakari and ubhayarthakari. wantdentt (Ekarthakari) wise tnt rer eget semenfei ci. 8/27 Some diseases subside after manifesting another disease — is called ekarthakdri. : saaeienitt (Ubhayarthakari) a msmaf ureet tek peas ai CN. 8/21 Initial disease will persist after manifesting another dis- ease and act as a etiology for the later disease. fag cg (Linga Sankarya) fq vente ade meat ager a areiga wig a farmer feta sett aa: | Tatar uate: dam feyqead | fama vat unl freed) . fagtisacara feeern: at arr: t C.Ni. 8/27-29 Linga sankarya means it gives an idea about the disease based on observation of various symptoms. For example One symptom pertain to many diseases One symptom pertain to one disease Many symptoms observed in one disease Many symptoms arise in many disorders For Example : L e Fever is a common symptom in many diseases having different patterns and complicated origin. e Various fever pattern observed in various diseases like jvara, Svasa, hikka etc.
368 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana-& Roga Vijfiana feryerga Wa (Classification of Linga Sinkarya) a wemraft wernt tae qHeaste a Wa Hapa so gaa euler: | mimayerarm ANT SMALL! C.Ni. 8/21-22 It can be classified into two kinds (i) Ekarthakéri and (ii) Ubhayarthakari Wenetenttt (Ekarthakari) Initial disease subsides after manifesting another disease is called ekarthakari. serarsieatht (Ubhayarthakari) Initial disease remains even after manifesting the another disease is called ubhkayarthakari. santa UE (Vyddhi Sankara) enftrage enferteran: | C.Ni. 8/21-22 (Cakrapani)} Combination of diseases is called vyadhi sankarda and it is very difficult for the management. warmups (Prayogaparisuddha) Faulty treatment like giving antidiarrhoel drugs in amatisara leading to manifestation of various adverse effects to the body i.e. Sula, @ndha, Gdhmdana etc. This condition will also become very difficult for management. Prart aeraner AEA (Importance of Nidana Paficaka) I Diagnostic Importance 1. Hetu gives idea about the existing disease and it also gives an idea about the unmanifested disease. Each disease has its own hetu. For example : Nidana Pajficaka : 369 Eating mud-causes pandu roga (i.e. mrdbhaksanajanya pandu roga) 2. a) It is difficult to diagnose the disease only on the basis of hetu because same hetu is responsible for many diseases. In such circumstances purvarupa helps to differentiate the dis- ease. For example : Jvara and gulma having the same niddna but pirvarupa of jvara & gulma are different and accordingly disease will be diagnosed. b) It is very much difficult to diagnose the disease based on laksana because some diseases having same set of symp- toms which confuses physician to differentiate diseases. In such circmstances pirvarupa helps to diagnose the disease. For ex- ample : Symptoms of adhoga raktapitta and pittaja prameha mim- ics, in such condition purvarupa helps to differentiate both. agent sit a qa fan wieer fe yet: at yprat 7 ae we Tne frre fe Go weata: 1 C.Ci 6/54 3. a) Rupa helps for diagnosis of diseases directly, for ex- ample excessive watery stool is the cardinal feature of atisdra. b) It also helps to know about the involvement of~dosds based on their presentations like pain along with roughness in- dicates vata, burning sensation pin points pitta etc. c) It also indicates the site of manifestation of diseases i.e. sandhivata etc. “ 4. Upasaya helps to diagnose a complicated and untraced disease i.e. guda linga vyadhi. For example : In case of vdtavyddhi and uristambha symptoms are simi- lar, that’s why it is very difficult to diagnose without the help of upasaya i.e. if patient gets relief after application of oily therapy indicates vatavyadhi otherwise uristambha. 5. Samprapti helps to diagnose the contributory factors of
370 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana the disease, which in turn indicates ‘the name of the disease. IT Therapeutic Importance of Nidaina Pajicaka 1. Hetu is the prime factor for the causation of disease. That’s why both Caraka and Susruta mentioned to avoid the etiological factor and it is the primary step in the management of any diseases. i) Waar: fran fare afaskry | S.Utt. 1/25 Avoid the causative factors, which are responsible for cau- sation of disease and it is the primary step to prevent further pathogenesis. ii)... Se Pertert wermngudantat 1) Ci za Avoid the etiological factors for smooth recovery of any diseases. 2. Prescription of medications in Purvarupa stage is more important for preventing the disease process to further stages. For example : Intake of ghee is advised in vdtika jvara purvarupa stage etc. If treatment started during parvarupa stage, it becomes easy for management and disease may cure quickly. 3. Rupa stage helps for planning vyGdhi pratyanika cikitsa. 4. Upasaya is the trial and error method for planning dif- ferent therapeutic procedures. : 5. Samprapti helps for prescribing sarnprapit vighatana cikitsa. lt also helps to plan samSodhana, sam$amana and langhana therapy based on morbidity of dosas. IIT Prognostic Importance of Nidana Pajicaka |. Powerful hezu signifies difficult to cure or incurable one. Mild hetu indicates disease become curable without diffi- culty. So, hetu gives idea about the prognosis of disease. 2. If purvarupa is mild, then disease become curable, oth- erwise it may become difficult to cure or incurable one, de- pending upon the nature of Purvarupa. ; Nidana_ Pajicaka 371 If all the purvarupa observed in a case of jvara that indi- cates death of the patient. 3. Mild rupa signifies curability and complete manifesta- tion of rupa indicates difficult for management or disease may become incurable. 4. Upasaya stage signifies the curability or incurability of the disease based on observation of 18 subtypes of upasaya. . 5. Involvement of all the three dosas, saptadhdtus, all the three rogamargas indicates the poor prognosis of the disease. This can be understood by samprapti. a woata ded fawn: aad 7 a1 daft: vem fet wert seen: | gketat grep fret deat fire cSa 1/93-94 The equilibrium state of dhatus is not disturbed nor the imbalanced state is brought to normalcy without some caus- ative factors. Which determine the equilibrium or imbalance state of dhdtus.
Chapter 18 wit utter (Rogi Partksa) and wT Uttar (Roga Pariksa) Physician should develop technical skill, scientific knowl- edge and human understanding to acquire complete knowledge for the diagnosis of various diseases. Patient is human, fearful, _hopeful, seeking relief and reassurance from physician to get rid off his or her afflictions. Physician should be attentive lis- tener, nonverbal communicator, friendly, emphathic and articu- late. It is important to diagnose the disease by using appropri- ate techniques and accordingly treat the treatable disease with love and affection. It is better not to treat uncurable diseases. Complete understanding of science is essential to get mastery and supremacy in clinical methods. frenger faara fe gienmdta a aa qafiyers WMetaistacraq | s.Su 10/7 Improper observation of patient by physician, which have not been thoroughly described and diseases which have not been diagnosed correctly are going to confuse the physician. itt: wera dart oftert a asta at a aeat aeerrateararat: 11 S.Su 10/9 The ideal physician should avoid the company of women and should not sit with them closely, staying with them, and cutting jokes with them and don’t accept any gift from women other than food. : C.Vi 8/68 Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 373 Certain important topics explained by Caraka for the sake of knowledge of physicians i.e. action must be initi- ated with due knowledge. Desired actions can be fulfilled without much effort provided if action was initiated after acquiring full knowledge of karana (cause), karana (instru- ment), kdryayoni (source of action), karya (action itself), karyaphala (fruits of action), anubandha (subsequent mani- festation), defa (habitat), kala (season), pravrtti (initiation) and upaya (means of action). Taenfaara ated, aitsaat aratat wafatter 1 tenia ard fated: wep ret caren Uttara act Utter Ute Ht TARA HWA | C.Vi 8/79 Examination of karandadi ten factors is essential to initiate actions. So, physician should examine all the essential factors which are necessary for the diagnosis of diseases after that ini- tiate actions to get desired result. waa fern teagat fereng orenfareA are safe; meen wdaaigda, Ugeaia, alex, vite, facet, SaHToTaT, wafediaaan, wafesen, sforfagar afr 1 C.Vi 8/86 Physician desirous of brining homeostasis among dhatu should adopt certain qualities to become ideal physician are as follows— knowledge of medical science in toto, practical expe- rience, skill, purity, ideal prescriptions, possessing all the equip- ments, normalcy of all sense organs, knowledge of the various natural manifestation and knowledge of course of action of pre~ scribed therapy. WMA Ge Sree: | deat allen ange: warorgragdtalrera, TANT Whursisedal | ax arated aerate wearer wraeal:; aeorrongent fe Fort waroreeren ser ware fasrercten safe 1 C.Vi 8/94 A patient constitutes karyadesa. That’s why patient should
374 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana be examined’ thoroughly to obtain the knowledge of life span, strength and intensity of morbidity. Main intention is to know the strength and the intensity of morbidity because treatment may be initiated after knowing the intensity of the morbidity and strength of patient. For example if stronger medicaments employed to a weaker patient it manifest many adverse reac- tions resulting into death. On the contrary if mild medicaments employed to a strong person having serious morbidity it may not cure the disease. Ladies, old age persons and children are delicate that’s why always mild medicaments must be pre- scribed. Were waa adisaa deer aa: eH fray cperarage waraty | weg taafagra antoara firs warfare = fakedgasar | aeq_ trifastaa: ud dasa aif: | ayaa | warmer «= faharaerry) —C.Su 20/20-22 Thorough examination of the patient is the initial step in clinical medicine followed by planning suitable appropriate therapeutics. If physician initiates the therapies without accu- rate diagnosis of the disease, accomplish the desired object only by chance and will not get-name and fame. On the contrary, if physician prescribes therapies after.proper diagnosis and plans the principle line of treatment after considering morbidity of _ pathogenetic factors, strength, place, season etc. definitely he ' will get success. — at arevenidg pret sitretenn 1 wereag oyaq aeafrraqefa i. C.Vi 9/26 ‘Physician should be symphathetic and affectionate to all the patients who are curable and should feel detached with those who are about to die. Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 375 wate wate at arfagia arated agement + a wWifsieeeti cv 472 Inspite of acquiring all the essential knowledge for the diag- nosis of disease and its management, if he didn’t try to enter into the heart of the patient by virtue through the light of his knowledge, he may not be able to treat the disease -success- fully. It udien te (Various methods of Rogi Pariksa) fafa atten (Two fold examination) fafaat avian rad weaaTAAs | C.Vi 8/83 There are two methods namely pratyaksa (perceptual) and anumadna (inferential). “‘fafaer ude (Three fold examination) aeagit oust: atid a dim 4ASu 1/22 Three fold examination techniques namely darsan (inspec- tion), sparSana (palpation) and pragna. (history taking). Fae way Sein Fard w PIMA STATS: WAAL, aa See 1 C.Vi 4/3 Threefold skills for the examination of patient are Gptopadesa (authoritative instruction), pratyaksa (direct obser- vation) and anumana (inferential). waqfaer uta (Four fold examination). Pratyaksa (direction observation), anumdna (inferential), aptopadesa (authoritative instruction) and yukti (experimental evidence) & , wafaet writ ater (Six fold examination) ugfaet fe vero feritor:, ween cafe: sttrfafa: wa atau S.Su 10/4
376 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana It is not possible to acquire the complete knowledge by three fold examinations, that’s why Susruta described six fold examination technique for the diagnosis of diseases. These are five sense organs and history taking i.e. 1. SparSanendriya (Organs of touch) . Syotrendriva (Organs of hearing) - Caksurindriya (Organs of sight) - Rasanendriya (Organs of taste) . Ghranendriya (Organs of smell) . Prasna (History taking) atsfag aia (Eight fold examination technique) Tirert yes erarast frites aret Ht ae fiat wre ears yuraefia | Yogaratnakara ANnNhfWN Nadi - Examination of Pulse Mitra — Examination of urine Mala - Examination of stool Jihvaé — Examination of tongue Sabda - Examination by organ of hearing Sparsa — Palpation Drk — Direct observation or inspection Akrti ~ Examination of whole body apfaer attat [Dasavidha Partkga (Ten fold examination)] THe waa wah, frais, aas, deriva, WANTS, TI, Mads, senses, eararsrag, aaedata.... 1 C.Vi 8/94 Prakrti_ Identification of constitutions . Vikrti~ Morbidity of pathologic factors . Sara— Examination of essence of dhatus . Pramana~ Examination of measurement of body organs. . Satmya— Examination of homologation 1. 2 3 4. Samhanana- Examination of compactness of body organs. 5 6 Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa — 377 7. Satva— Examination of mental faculties 8. Ahara Sakti- Examination for power of exercise 9. Vyayama Sakti- Examination for power of exercise 10. Vaya— Examination of age. Adee Weel went (Susrutokta Dvadasa Pariksa (Twelve fold examination) ] 1. Ayu 2. Vyadhi 3. Rtu 4. Agni 5. Vaya 6. Deha 7. Bala 8. Satva 9. Satmya 10. Prakrti 11. Bhesaja 12. Desa. _ fifaer atten (Three fold examination) agit (Inspection) aphia Gea, reer Wayectant sears waohweeresra4 ! A.H.Su 1/21 (Sarvanga sundara) Things identified by direct observation of patient either directly or indirectiy is called darsana pariksa. In darsana pariksa following other :pariksa may also be considered namely pratyaksa partks&, caksurindriya pariksa, drk pariksd, akrti partksa, jihva partksa etc. Dargana pariksa helps to detect the changes in colour, structure, size, shape, deformities etc. wait atta {Sparsana Pariksa (Palpation)] SRT SRT, Te eafeeTeMy, Ten viidtereTset- 26 Vik. & Roga
378 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana erayrianarcamfaas WAL. Su 1/21 (Sarvanga sundara) It is an palpatory method helps to understand coldness, hotness, palpitations, coarsness, smoothness etc. Under sparsana partksd the following other examination tools may be included namely sparSanendriya partksa, nadi pariksG, sparsa partksa etc. It is helpful in detecting the change of body temperature, organomegaly, consistency etc. wea atten [Prasna Pariksa (History taking)] jeiafrd searengkraatgees YE gaik a, sraTa- Farantad tt A.H.Su 1/21 (Sarvanga sundara) Prasna pariksa is helpful to know about aggravating and relieving factors of diseases like Sula etc. along with it guides to understand about various kinds of kostha (mrdu, madhya and krira kostha) In this other examination methods may also be included like miutra partksa, mala partksa, anumana pariksa, Gptopadesa pariksa etc. By this entire history. taking meth- ods like name, age, sex, occupation, address, chief com- plaints, history of present illness; past history family his- tory, drug history, personal history may be taken into con- sideration. wear wae wat BVA Wal (Pratyaksa Pariksé and Anumana Pariksa] A WA ATT TELAT VLA ATTA AA, TATE: Ye FT: Guonsea: vereakranhsa werent: 11 Ci 8/39 Substances perceived by the self or through the ‘sense organs may be included under direct observation. Examples are happiness, sorrow, desire, jealousy etc. are felt by the Rogi Pariks4 and Roga Pariksa 379 individual and sound etc. are perceived by the help of sense organs. WRT WAT Sea TER, TIM BrAge, UbeepET- ageitadun a, watfavieis, & arast afresteren: yen: aqdsienin at arara gar we wae wea Tad arerertt aed, aixentoedrs orice, siete & FE mifteifed aifeafed afar vaomathteiearantcetted- frahreargareny, WHAT AANGT PRA WAP Tas; HIRT orion wenfairatre | sit meres yarreuayraay Ute 11 C.Vi 4/07 Physician desirous of examining specific findings of the disease by pratyaksa by his sense organs and detecting the ab- normality in the sense organ of the patient except the organ of taste. Detection of findings by the organ of hearing are as follows— e Gurgling sound in the abdomen e Cracking and crepitation in big and small joints. e Voice of patient Other abnormal sounds produced in various diseases Jike hikka, Svasa, svara bheda, kasa etc. Factors detected by organs of sight are as follows— e Colour, shape, measurement and. complexion. e Natural & unnatural changes in body. e Other findings examined visually like signs of the dis- ease, lustre and other abnormalities.
380 Ayurvediya -Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijfiana Factors. detected by organs of taste— Taste can be perceived by the gustatory sense organs and they. can be ascertained by inference and not by direct observa- tion. That’s why taste in the mouth of patient may be obtained by interrogation... Impairment of the taste of body should be inferred when lice etc. go away from the body. Sweetness of the body can be inferred when flies are attracted towards the body. If there is a bleeding from the body, then it should be checked by giving blood to dogs and crows to eat to check the nature of blood. If the blood consumed by dogs and crows it indi- cates it is pure blood and if it is rejected by them, then it indicates that blood is vitiated by pitta and patient may be suffering from raktapitta, Similarly other tastes in the patient’s body can be inferred. Factors detected by organs of smell— Normal and abnormal smells of the whole body may be detected by organ of smell. Factors detected by organ of touch- Normal and abnormal findings of touch may be examined by hand. ATA wate (Inference) C.Vi 4/8 ‘By inference following assumptions can be made are as follows— e Power of agni by the process of digestion and metabo- lism. e Exercise endurance capacity decides the strength of the person. Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 381 e Normal functions of the sense organs signals their nor- malcy e Morbidity of pathogenic factors may be ascertained by causative factors, if more causative factors in- volved then morbidity may be severe, on the con- trary if these are less then mild morbidity is observed etc. Boast At smedtaest (Authoritative Testimony) C.Vi 4/6 Acaryas described the following points for the understand- ing and: diagnosis of diseases are as follows— e Aggravating factors e Involvement of dosas e How the disease manifested e Nature of the disease indicating acuteness, chronicity ‘or fatalness. e@ Location of the disease either in Sarira or mana or both. Pain symptomatology e Associated with specific sounds, touch, colours, tastes : and smell. e Complications Factors which excacerbates symptoms, alleviates and brings homeostasis. Prognosis Names Concomitants Management principles Avoidance of ‘certain things etc. Based on the above description one should acquire knowl- edge and develop excellency in clinical methods as well as in management. wafer Wie (Six fold examination) 1. SARZa Uttent (Examination by Hearing) aa stafxafesen faster Tg aurea fraritaneg aaa
582 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijhana & Roga Vijfiana wa Td Gaaahe: ayed frateata setanrea: 1 s.su 70/5 This method of examination helps to elicit the abnor- malities in various diseases by hearing. For example, if for- eign body lodged in dhamani (blood vessels) leading to . ©xcacerbation and agitation of vata resulting into flow of ”. frothy blood: associated with sound, pain all over the body, thirst and nausea. Detection by hearing Name of the disease RR A (Svara bheda) arast of (Vataja chardi) Was AM (Vataja kasa) THA (Raktapitta) Ws SISA (Pandu upadrava) GET SaSq (Trsna@ upadrava) ast BA (Ksayaja kasa) ATIH: AAT CAT (Alasaka asddya laksana) BHA (Ardita) arr ald (Vataja chardi) UGIIT TE (Dhatuksayaja daha TTS AAR CHa (Galaganda asadhya laksana) BUTS (Jarasosa) STTRIT FAT (Abhinydasa jvara) ads AM (Ksataja kasa) PS AAT AAMT (Kustha asadhya. laksana). SHIT PS (Asthigata kustha) TST Bws (Majjagata kustha) ! PVA eu J (Kustha sdmanya laksana) 1 ira (Pinasa) , arast Waka (Vataja pratisyaya Usa STATE CRT (Rajayaksma asadya laksana) UIST. BY (Rajayaksma rupa) : : (SarpadamsSa asadhya laksana) ast SIRS STENT f (Vataja stanya panaja bala roga) | RK Fe WT (Svara bheda roga) 1 CRY (Svaraghna) . ' sant TON (Upasargaja trsna) i faust SHE (Visaja unmada) (Vilambika asddhya laksana) BAKA (Hata svara) STAC (Ksama svara) PRAHA (Svara bhinna) auaETa (Svaropaghata) / @AEK (Dinasvara) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 383 AGS WTWS (Medaja galaganda) BU] TG (Anu svara) TN IaAT, KA (Gardabhavat svara) TL CGH (Khara svara) ants FAH (Vataja svarabheda) Aas FACIE (Vataja svarbheda)
384 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiiana a SX (Ksama svara) | HAH STAT we 7 (Alasaka asa@dhya laksana) Ud wast ale - (Dhatu ksayaja daha) fia araceroy (Pinasa Gmalaksana AS TATA STRAT (Vataja stanyapanaj balaroga) YA BF (Svaraksaya) | AT AIA (Vataja kasa) wt mK (Sanai svara) ast carie (Vataja svarabheda) | URTaT Fa. srr Mast HI (Ksatajakasa) | (Paravata iva kitjana) © eRe (Svarahani) at wes (Strt sarpa dasta) TAUAT (Svaramaya) | TRAST BTA (Pittaja kasa) aeaedy (Vaisvaryam) frat are (Pittaja kadsa) ast AM (Ksayaja kasa) | ae ee (Dina svara) ctl wfaeart (Dusta prati$yaya) | (Bhinna kamsya svara) flat tax (Bhinna svara) FART WMS (Asadya galaganda St: AT (Urak ksata) Set (Ardita) FARAGS (Asadya kusta) Safran . (Abhinydsajvara) ae ang (Ordhvasvasa) wera (Svaropaghdta} SRST ps (Asthi_ majjdgata kusta) BIEN (Hata ‘svara) Rogl Partks4 and Roga Pariksa 385 Heth Tal | meq wats (Madya madarista) (Avyakta svara) BCT FAL (Alpa svara) | BUTE (Kaphonmada) wale (Yaksonmada) W's (Pandu) 38a (Ardita) Uae (Paksaghata) Meer (Mahahikka) Ass (Bhayajajvara) MHSSAT (Sokajajvara) THTAsAl (Raktagatajvara) Fehrasat (Medogatajvara) aWAsat (Vatajvara) fHatsat (Pittajvara) afsafatnsat (Sannipatikajvara) SMRASAL (Asadyajvara) fSaAAA (Chinnasvasa) Set (Ojahksaya) SPARS (Abhinyasajvara) are fea (Yamala hikka) asit sama (Ajirna upadrava) aaa SAGA (Vataja amlapitta) | stgreaR JIRA (Asrgdhara upadrava) Wat (Pralapa)
386 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiiana SRR STE rATTT (Atisdra asadhya laksana) dst ae (Ksataja daha) Sas vat (Antarvega jvara) afedy sax (Bahirvega jvara) aitst Weleta (Vataja madatyaya) Pretest Far (Tridosaja masurika qa fay (Mila visa) Fat Teor (Madyaja miurccha) fA TU (Pittaja trsna) arent GERRI (Varavyadhi pitrvarupa) frets ferent (Tridosaja visphota) Aatera ay (Marmaghata vrana) aARaTe (Ativak) areftd sat (Vata pitta jvara) alex (Vatodara) el (Ahantamddmatadrti Sabdavadbhavati) (Sasula Sabda) anyy (Atopa) aratat (Vatodara) Sel (Udara) Tea yaeq (Gulma pirvarupa) goss saad (Purisaja udavarta) SIR qaeg (Apasmdara piirvarupa SMTA (Amatisara) opie fast (Kuksi vidradhi) ats FRA (Vataja gulma) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 387 SRAM (Adhmana) SAS! Yet (Amaja sila) art Waar (ArSa purvarupa) fern Wer (Hikka purvarupa) TART : (PakvaSayagatavata) ONT (Vataja parinamasula) aft fag (Nabhi vidradhi) TERIAL (Baddhagudodara) BAe THT (Yamala hikka) SHA TON (Kaphaja trsna) Sst ya (Amaja Trsna) sera (Udavarta) alas aeforery (Vataja grahani dosa) area wr (Adhmana roga) qeatas (Puspa visa) BENT (Udararoga) SMT AT (Amasaya vrana) SUERTE. STATE CRT (Antarvidradhi asadya laksana) sea yer (Asmari purvarupa) arate (Asthila) afaat yer (Atisara Pirvarupa) mfas (Garavisa) * Yett ald (Gudagata vata) TR ET (Gulmaroga purvarupa) adsl sal (Vataja jvara) Sear (Adhmana)
388 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana ANS AUT (Kosta vtana) PETIT PAPA (Sakrdvighdtaja mittrakrcchra) TAISL (Miutrajathara) Urraitot RET (Pandajirna laksana) SITS TROT ( Vatajaparindmasiila) SME (Pratyadhmana) are Gag (Svasaroga pirvarupa) aa sen (Vataja udararoga) area sag (Vatavyadhi upadrava) - fassersitt (Vistabahajtrna) ATTA (Vataja kasa) Tetras yey (Grahanidosa purvarupa airnfaa agoitaty. ror ten aese) (Gulmaroga purvarupa) wet sth (Sahaja arga) are qaeag (Arsa purvarupa) aTeMfeRaR (Vatatisara) Weal (Mandagni) aad (Amavata) TON AAR, ceT (Gulmaroga samanyalaksana) TARTANA, Pakvasayagatavata) STARA (Antrakijana) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 389 2. wastifxa atta (Examination by Touch) wareirnteg | S.Su 10/5 Things detected with the help of touch are as feilows— cold, heat, smoothness, roughness, softness, hardness etc. For Example— eo oy as (usna sparéa) observed in TAX (jvara) e FG east (mrdu sparsa) observed in fardteax (pittodara) e f&K, wfart Sat (Sthira, kethina udara) observed i in aed (kaphodara ) wie afsutssteaet airy: a a arafiga: por fe sr rit en * — C.Ci 13/37 In case of plihodar spleen becomes enlarged, it become like a stony piece initially and gradually enlarges to become like a tortoise. It neglected, it gradually overlaps belly, abdo- men and pancreas. et Sto Arad 3A (Ivara) ’ (Dhamani sosna Vegavati) Was (Mandagni) aret WERT (Nadi mandatara) — (Ksinadhatu) fier ud aera GPatet (Sukhitasya) (Sthira evam balavati) Teaisheideat vata Seer (Udakodara) (M RE a samsparsam bhavati) oftfafisacard waxifrearra: (Paripinditatvat sparsopa labhyah) TFA (Gulma)
390 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana $2 PA (Dukha sparsa) AAT BA (Ksataja kiisa) eaeigeatate (Sparsajrarvamiti)| FS FEST (Kustha purvarupa) wed erate, TAR BS (Carmakhya (Bahalam hasticarmavat) kustha) fan ax asf Ted (Kina khara fies OU (Kitibha kustha sparSam parusam) demise (Samsparsasah wee (Carmadala) amucyate), 3. agfitfza wien (Examination by Sight) agkfae fava: sihiererneranrgeiant act aul rearrea: | S.Su LO/S The following things can be detected through the exami- nation by sight are increase or decrease of the body, signs of life span, change in strength and colour etc. wittawakt sears: wied, waa: Hed, aT SATE | S.Su 10/5 (Dathana) Upacaya means obesity, Apacaya refers to emaciation, bala refers to loss of enthusiasm. snaa 39 (Avila netra) aeat Yaar (Ardita purvarupa) aks Aye fras aret (Pittaja arga) (Haridra netrata) AAT AAT (Kamala asadhyalaksana) arent yefeu (Vatavyadhi piirvarupa) aa gUSq (Netra hundana) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 391 arnt (Amdjirna) FQUaNST IIS (Mridbhaksanajanya pandu) qs yee (Pandu piirvarupa) Bhs RUT (Kaphaja sirahSila) afape vita (Aksikiita §otha) STMT (Aksiraga) or safe (Aksiraktata or TH Aa (Rakta netra) Test STH (Raktaja Abhisyanda) HA STSTEA CTT (Kamala asadhya laksana ars AUT (Kostha vrana) HS AREA AaAT (Kustha asadhya laksana) Seas HS (Asthimajjagata kustha) Fees SARRA CRIT (Madatyaya asadhya laksana) first walla (Pitraja masisriké) HART yaar (Masitrika piirvarupa. Tes AGRA (Raktaja masirika) ast WWE (Vataja pandu) Ritco a (Sankhaka) fraftaqae (Sitapitta purvarupa) fRIst WM (Pittaja sotha) frrsi FIM (Pittaja sna) fassl SAE (Visaja unmada) fea as (Nisteja netra) WS (Pandu) Bisex (Jirna jvara)
392 Ayurvediya. Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana prferenter (Stinaksigotha) faaracirat (Vibh rantalocana ) That ( Raktaikalocana ) faweeet (Vistabdhaksa) PRT WTS (Mrdbhaksanajanya pandu) Fela (Mahasvasa) faa (ChinnaSsvasa) SNA (Antarayama) afevara (Bahirayama) faa seefatero FAITH (Manyastambha) (Vikrta Urdhvan- iriksana) seat af (Arsa) (Aksno Svayathu) : VATARSTy 3X (Udara) (Syavaruna Nayana) : way aaa BIN specs fad (Visarpa) (Caksuso Akulatva) Svetavabhasata Atimatram) WS (Pandu) (Sve tapita locana) wrt fs (Stabdha drsti) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 393 araah mMyesaehiticdte aTaTeet (Baddhagudodara) (Nabhyupari gopu- cechavadabhinirvartat) efor oe (Kukseratimatra vrddhi) aarRcARAgeeneeq] tea (Ardita) (Vakrikarotinasabh- rulalataksihanu) wed aE (Ordva drsti) WM (Jalodara) fever srarer eT (Hikk@ asadhya laksana) wea (Urdvasvasa) waar (Urdhvasvasa) efe fara (Drsti viparyaya) PUA (Krsna netrata) arast att (Vataja Aréa) BAC SAT] ROT (Kamala asadhya laksana) att Wg (Vataja pandu) “aS wae (Vataja svarabheda) ams 3ryf (Kaphaja arsa) Wf (Panaki) Ws Saey cay (Pandu asaddhya laksana) as Ara (Pandu netrata) WaATH (Pranetrata) | ATE (Kamala) first sat (Pittaja jvara) frat WS (Pittaja pandu) Aces STATED CRU (Madatyaya asadhya laksana) 27 Vik. & Roga
394 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana [ss frst rock’ (Pittaja svarabheda) Tata WEA are (Kamala) (Raktapita Sakrnmitra) BA AT (Riksa netra) | AAA WS (Vataja pandu) %. TeaPsa attant (Examination by Taste) vaifea fata osieley wafer: By inference one can ascertain the vitiation in rasanen- driya. For example if bees flies attracted towards prameha pa- tient, it indicates tanumadhuryata of prameha rogi. . ara (Arocaka) STA ~SURA (Amavata upadrava) Or afer srecfrd steft (Aruci) (Kaphapittaja amlapitta) SAGA AT (Amlapitia laksana) arta OT (Arocaka roga) amet sf (Kaphaja arsa) al sama (Arsa upadrava) arast aret (Vataja aréa) area qaer (ASmari piirvarupa) atin Bf (Kaphaja chardi) wf vies (Chardi purvarupa) wfaaris! Ble (Sannipataja chardi) ‘qfafas aT «(Dusivisa laksana) weft ae (Grahani dosa) arrest Were ® (Vatakaphaja grdhrasi) wht THT (Kaphaja gulma roga) Bleqqs (Halimaka) S.Si 3/8 Rog! Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 395 Bhs ant (Kaphaja hrdroga) SRR (JaraSosa) SAL (Ivara) AMAT (Kamala) af (Krmi) WAR (Masizrika) jamie seat | (Kapha pittaja amlapitta) Het sha (Kaphaja arocaka) ant aff a7 (Kaphaja chardiroga) PHT MWS (Kaphaja galaganda) are efits (Kaphaja grahani dosa) wha Eaht (Kaphaja hrdroga) BAM SAL (Kaphaja jvara) wae qaeq (Prameha pirvarupa) FbT JOM (Kaphaja trsni) WIE AAA (Pravrddha amavata) sean (Arocaka) SR (Ivara) - IG (Kasa) Set (Udara) sifaa fatal eI Sea RAT (Asita Jihva) (Madatyaya asadhya laksana) fail AT (Jihva lepa) | HHT SUA (Kaphaja Gmlapitta ATatsel (Nila jihva) | WEIS STRATEN. GraTOT ; oe (Madatyaya asidhya laksana) arer aet (Asya vairasya)
396 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana fora fereapeet (Jihva niskarsya) gon faust ae (Trsna_nirodhaja daha) far PIT (Jinva sosa) | Tom PRT ae (Trsna@ nirodhaja daha) forarerea TTSTETFA (Jihvastambha) (Jihvastambha) frarmues (Jihvaupadeha) feat aaa (Jihva vepana) wae yaar (Prameha purvarupa) gombrerst ae (Trsna@ nirodhaja daiha) 4, BMPs ata (Examination by Smell) Bites fader sheegey, sonra a wafaste: S.Su 10/5 Diagnosis of the diseases based on abnormal smell, which emits either from wounds or non wounded region. TTA (Gandha nasa)| Soa (Apinasa) ara SAL (Abhinydsa jvara) ge wfazara (Dusta pratisyaya) thst Waa (Raktaja pratisyaya) afer SIXT (Pratigyaya upadrava) aires srareq aR (Vrscikadarhsa asadhya laksana) a ehfes (Gatradaurgandhya) SA Yel (Asya Pitita). AS ATT (Kostha vrana) aa wa (Medo roga) FRI STK (Pittaja arocaka) Were (Putinasya) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 397 grat a (Durgandha kapha) TIA A (Ksayaja kasa} eeabregaanry =| ararenereacta: | cara ofierareart uefa... C.Ci 2/9 When pitta amalgamates with morbid raktadhatu, it at- tains its colour and smell is called raktapitta. oentrarfa: area (Lohagandhischanihsvasa) sy ters THA Ie (Raktaja daha) (Anga lohagandha) Tet qaaeg (Raktapittapitrvarupa) &. Wea Utten (Examination by. Interrogation) wer a faarteest art sift anenneg ayeaht aan ERS ae rer NeTOT WaRTTEe aareERURSET fers | areragey fagrangurag auntie 11 S.Su 10/5 Things obtained by interrogation are as follows— Place, time (season), caste, cor duciveness, how the symp- toms manifested, aggravation and relieving factors, Strength and nature of agni, eliminations or non elimination of flatus, urine, stool, duration of the diseases (time factors for excacerbation of disease) etc. Such other things may be collected from persons re- siding with or close relative of the patient. Dega— Whether person belongs to janghaladesa, anupa dega and sadharana deéa. ‘ Jati refers to various religions like bhramana, ksGtriya etc. kala is divided into two i.e. nityaga and dvasthika. Nityaga comprises rtu laksana, day night etc. Avasthika is again subdivided into two i.e. svasthasya
398 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiiana badlyadi bhedena and vyddhitasya jvararambhddi kalav- astha. 1 .Svasthasya balyadi bhedena- \n this understanding of age like children, youth, old age person. 2. Vyadhitasya jvararambhadi kdlavastha. It signifies about the onset and history of diseases. VETERE BT; MET are ap teerer sennst Tatar wears | S.Su 10/5 (Dathana) Satmya means which gives conduciveness and comfortness to body. Which is divided into two types namely cestakhya and aharakhya. Cestakhya describes functions attributed to body, speech, and mind. AAarakhya means 6 kinds of taste. amg wget: BUTEA | S.Su 10/5 (Dathana) Causative factors of the disease is called atanka samutpatti. srearergegrateter aan amfeaqaenaea:, wat we sata: | Dalhana VedanG samucchraya means description of various kinds of pains resulting due to vatddi dosdas. ae cara vif: | Dalhana Bala can be elicited by exercise endurance. srenfafata wat faaat wat ar t Dalhana Antaragni means condition of agni whether it is normal, abnormal or dull. asta utter a secant rite (Hight folds of Examination) Tear ier Tarra Fria | Yogaratnakara described eight varieties of rogi pariksa namely nddi, mitra, mala, jihva, §abda, sparsa-and drk for the diagnosis of diseases. Yogaratnakara 5 Rogi Pariks4 and Roga Pariksa 399 aret atten (Examination of Pulse) Examination of the nadi is necessary to diagnose altered condition of dosas like diminished functions or hyper func- tions or mixed or normal functions of dosas. Nadi pariksa sheds light on entire condition of diseases. Sites of Nadi Partksa ae SCTE: wasefarort me | wert otf det = feefaurnfier it Yogaratndkara 5 Physician has to examine the pulse of the patient in right hand by using his right hand. ° Stags at et itera | wae YS TU Wi wraer ulosa: 1) Sa.S. Pi. 3/1 Pulse felt at the wrist region signifies the life of the patient and physician should be able to diagnose the disease and healthy condition by observing the nature of the pulse. Use right hand for male patients and left hand for female Patients because it is best felt in respective hands. art atten fafét (Process of Examination of Pulse) Physician should be seated in comfortable position and in a healthy composed mood, then start examining the pulse of the patient in morning hour for one prahara. Vaidya must hold the patient elbow gently with the left hand and feel the pulse with his right index, middle and ring fingers kept in close ap- position near wrist region. aaa wad gear gen fate | faqa aga gan treatm fares Yogaratnakara 6 Examine the pulse thrice by pressing and releasing
400 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiiana technique and diagnose the disease by using his intelligent power. wai Heent diet fafrefeq ceri “ Yogaratnakara 6 Identify the vata, pitta & kapha pulsations at the index, middle and ring fingers respectively and elicit its characters like feeble, moderate and’ fast. Along with identify the charac- ' ter of various dosic pulse. wearers fade a ad art waradqit Yogaratnakara 6 Examination of pulse shed light on the involvement of vata or pitta or kapha or mixing of two dosas or amalgamation of three dosa or curable disease or incurable disease. art wate (Synonyms of Pulse) arpist att git wt awit ads wiet silaage yet: «= cafesarerest: 11 . Yogaratnakara 6 Synonyms of nadi are sndyu, nadi, hamsi, dhamani, dharani, dhara, tantuki, jivanjnana. Contra Indications for Nadi Pariksa Care yet am eamie: | area gore at wear a geal Yogaratnakara 6 Pulse should not be examined in following conditions. e Just after taking bath. e Just after taking food. _@ After internal and external oleation therapy. e During hunger Rogi Partksa and Roga Pariksa 401 e During thirst e During sleep or just after awakening. Excellency in nadi pariksa may be attained by constant effort and practical experience by observing puise of various healthy and diseased individuals. It is accepted that almighty god resides in nadi i.e. Brahma resides in vatanadi, Sankara resides in pitta nddi and Visnu resides in kapha nadi. aa aimaer ast ueq ag fiers ara vetafeeartor art Fa AAT Aer: 11 Yogaratnakara 7 Pulsation felt in index, middle and ring finger signifies vata, pitta and kapha nadi respectively. Physiological State of Pulse Gharcar Fert Far am seadt wai sas.Pz 3/8 Pulse of healthy individual is steady and forceful (with normal rate, rhythm, character and symmetry). eam aa oa at ad®a asenfteit: Ta wre a warensstra wae! Yogaratnakara 9 Waveform of the nadi resembles that of swan or elephant with freshness in face signifies the healthy pulse. Pulse in Various Pathological States Wave form of the na@di in various dosic excacerbations. Vata Prakopa Nad amt ad asena weitere) sas.Pa 3/2 Waveform of the vata prakopa resembles the movement like that of jalauka (leech) or sarpa (snake). Pitta Prakopa Nadi olayanrarges mt frre ala: | sas.Pr 3/2
402 Ayurvediya Vikiti Vijiiina & Roga Vijfiana Condition of waveform in agitated pitta resembles move- ment of kulinga (sparrow), kaka (crow) and mandika (frog). Kapha Prakopa Nadi eaonrad nit wt yey welod: il Sa.s.Pn 3/3 Waveform of kapha prakopa nadi resembles movements of hamsa (swan) or padradvata (pigeon). Te WAM ued ater: 1 erpeet nit a amt aaafeiti Yogaratndkara 7 Waveform of kapha prakopa nadi is slow and resembles movements like that rajahamsa (swan), mayura @peacock), pGrdavata (pigeon), kapota (pigeon ivariety), kukkuta (hen). Sannipatika Dosa Prakopa Nadi : : . aoe eratakitadiar Wt Uhraraat: 1 SG.S.Pi 3/3 Waveform of sannipatika prakopa nddi resembles the movements like /ava (bustard quai)), rittira (grey partridge) and varti (button quail). Dvandva Dosa Prakopa Nadi weaker aelfaesentedt | facta aaladt WaT $a.8.Pin 3/4 Waveform of dvandva dosa prakopa nadi becomes some- times slow and sometimes fast. Pathological Conditions of Nadiin Various Diseases wat ao et aon ane wat $4.5.PH 3/6 Pulse is rapid and hot in various fevers. STA SataTSTaET SB.S.Pis 3/6 Pulse rate increases during kama (lust) and krodha (anger) Rogi Paritksa and Roga Pariksa 403 afton fart wereqa | $a.8.Pi 3/6 Pulse rate decreases during cinta (worry), bhaya (fear) wart: anes at weet WAL! Sa.5.Pu 3/7 Slow and feeble pulse felt in mandagni (decreased diges- tion and metabolism) and ksina dhatu (decreased dhdatus). argagui waraien | $a.8.Pi 3/7 Warm pulse felt in case of vessels which are full of blood in excess. yet ara were 1 - $a.8.Pia 3/7 During sama state pulse will be heavy and tense. weit aedt date anaft wal Sas.Pa 3/8 During powerful digestive capacity pulse will be light and fast. want gfe gaa aeia fer SaS.Px 3/9 During hunger pulse become unsteady and flows steadily. Pulse Indicating Poor Prognosis Bra w warfare | fron frown wera ar ar een TOTTI afaeiton @ vita a sitfad ere | Sa.S.Pi 3/8 Displacements of nadt from its own place and moves slowly and slowly this indicates patient’s poor prognosis and patient will die. Feeble and cold pulsations definitely kill the patient. wma wise ot. wae ange: | Yogaratnakara 8 Pulse which has ‘increased tremors with palpitations should be rejected for treatment. Normal pulse becomes fast suddenly signifies death of a person within fortnight.
404 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Mitrapariksa (Examination of Urine) Process of Collection of Urine- Fremerart ufeeraqea sema der: fet wfit a 1 wa ad wert ag wa gale aad wai Yogaratnakara 10 Awaken the patient in the early morning around 4 am and collect the urine in fresh glass jar and examine the urine after sunrise. Wes Set ORs eae Tea archer aera TT Tera Bq Halfeatacat aad fra 1 Don’t collect first few drops of urine and collect only the middle stream and then examine the urine for better results. Yogaratnakara 10 Dosdanusara prakupita mitra laksana. (Characters of urine vitiated by dosas). Yogaratndkara 10 ATARI YA CHAU (Urine vitiated by vata) art @& UVEt (Urine becomes pale) BH TaRly Wa AAT (Urine vitiated by kapha) Wat Wat Sate: | Froathy urine indicates kaphaja vitiation in urine faa vata Wa TAIT (Urine vitiated by pitta) uw aut wafers | Reddish colour of urine signifies pitta involvement. ast war fratast year yt cet Mixed features observed as per dominancy of dosas. ait a swt eer TUT | Colour of the urine becomes black due to vitiation of three dosas. Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 405 ‘ter farg Uttet (Taila Bindu Pariksa) Put one drop of tila taila by the help of trna in collected urine, if urine spreads indicates good prognosis, doesn’t spread signifies difficult prognosis and if it sinks it indicates incurable disease. Yogaratnakara If tila taila drop spreads towards purva (east) indicates good prognosis and person become healthy quickly. e If tila taila drop spreads towards daksina (south), it in- dicates person is suffering from fever and patient be- comes alright gradually. @ If tila taila drop spreads towards uttara (north) definitely patient is going to be free from disease. e If tila taila drop spreads towards pascima (west) region, it signifies person become healthy and happier. e If tila taila drops spreads towards igfhdfiya (north east) region definitely patient is going to die within a month. e If tila taila drop spreads towards agneya (south east) and nairutya (south west) and spreaded drop becomes many pieces, if indicates death of the patient. e If tila taila drop spreads towards vayavya (north west) definitely patient is going to die, even if nectar was given to him. e If tila taila drop attains various shapes like cow, head- less body, weapon size, tortoise, quadrangular, triangu- lar don’t treat such patients. e If tila taila drop attains shapes like lotus, ponds, pigeon, elephant, house etc. then treat the patient. e If tila taila drop attains shape like that of man or ap- pearance of two brains signifies person is suffering from. bhuta dosa. : If tila taila drop attains round shape it indicates vata dosa vitiation, pointed indicates kapha dosa vitiation and bubbles indicates pitta vitiation and if it sinks indi- cates involvement of all the three dosds.
406 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana niger qaacf a ate fart at aitged a ite 1 areat fad qhaararganon qaterdtast tte at vvogaratnakara 12 By observing various colour changes in urine like reddish, smoky, blue, sticky, watery, cold etc. one can diagnose the dis- ease. Characteristics of Urine in Various Disorders Disease Nature of Urine Transparent, abundant, white, cold ' odorless and water like e S 5 Sy iS 3 ® > & eo 8Y ae ({ksu meha) Sweet like sugarcane juices, little viscous, turbid and cold ° Ute (Sandra meha) | Dense deposition of precipitate in . vessel oe Ure woe Fe Partly precipitates and partly clear (Sandra prasada meha) e Yo ae (Sukla meha) | White urine like flour with frequent micturation ° Uh Ae (Sukra meha) |Contains seminal fluid or looks like seminal fluid : e Mit Fe (Sita meha) Frequent micturation with excessive sweetness and cold eo fama Ae (Sikata meha)| Small particles appears in urine eo WAR AE (Sanaira meha)j Passes urine with difficulty slowly . and slowly in little quantity. SAT CTET Re (Aléla meha) | Urine becomes like threads, frothy and saliva like ea Re (Ksara meha) |Smell, colour, taste and touch of urine like those of alkalies e &el HE (Kala meha) | Huge quantity of black urine Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 407 Urine becomes sour taste and colour appears like that of the feather of casa bird (blue jay) THe (Rakta meha) Colour of urine is red with saline taste and smells like that of raw flesh. afaret ae Colour of urine.is like that of the (Maiijistha meha) decoction of majijistha having fleshy smell Bhs Fe Colour of urine is like that of decoc (Haridra meha) tion of haridra having pungent taste ware (Vasa meha) Frequently passes urine mixed with vasa or similar to it sil ae (Majja meha) | Frequent micturation mixed with majja efer Ae (Hasti meha) Large quantity of urine comes out constantly like an excited elephant. / ay ae (Madhu meha)| Colour of the urine becomes pale and ununctous having sweet and e aa ae (Nila meha) astringent taste aT (ASmari) . Saunas (Udaka meha) STAT ae (Amla meha) ala Fe (Nila ‘meha) qs SATS (Purisaja Gnaha) arafdafi stared Tett (Antarvidradhi Asadhya laksana) oe (Accha mitra) ° et WaT (Amla mistrata) em (Mitra badha) or
408 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiina Wa UF (Mitra sanga)| STvAft. spare, ceqTay or Ba arate (Mitra avarodha) ‘(ASmari asadhya laksana) arts SSte (Vataja asthila) ages ae (Vatadustistanyapanaja balaroga) Ter ald (Gudagata vata) SHIT AA (Kaphavrta samana) anbortara ad (Kosthasrita vata) yen (Midhagarba) TUF (Miutrasanga laksana) TATA T wm (Miutraghata roga) wea WARS (Sarkara mittrakrcchra) free WeaTST (Niruddha prakdasa) Arete TROT eT . (Vataja parinamasila) Westen (Pratyasthila) WaT. STATE CATT (Sarkara asGdhya laksana) Fel A (Maha. svasa) ws Fates sera (Sukra nirodhaja-uddvarta) alas serad (Vataja udavarta) ardafed (Vata vasti) fergherenr SISA (Visucika upadrava seat qaeq (Asmari pirvarupa) SET aryt (Kaphaja aréa) Tey FART Tey TAPS (Mitra krcchra) © Rogi Pariksa4 and Roga Pariksa 409 (Gulma samanya laksana) AT Sa TTT WHS WT (Mirakrechra roga) TAA (Miutrasada) TATA WT (PakvaSayagata vata) RI CORLIES (Sukraémari)|} eT (Sarkara) ma ft sera (Mitra nirodhaja udavarta) STAT (Usna vata) aftafaster (Basti vidradhi) fas. ferent (Vid vighata) ant 3tet (Vataja arsa) SIAC. STaTeT AaAOT (Kamala asadhya laksana) ast Wg (Vataja pandu) aI TRAE (Vataja svarabheda) wet AS (Kala meha) auT ae (Lavana meha) cited ae (Lohita meha) THe (Rakta meha) Mast ste (Vataja asmari) haw (Mutrotsanga) ATGUSlARM (Vata kundalika) SIS! FARES (Vataja miitrakrcchra wR He (Sanair meha) sqarferst AS (Iksuvalika meha) alate (Ksaudra meha) (Yaksma asadhya laksana) gfe (Vrddhi) Pal WaT (Krsna mutrata) Taal AAT (Lavana mitrata) TEI (Miralpara) Tae Ya (Madhura mitrata) 28 Vik. & Roga
410 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Seie A vafa (Muhu muhu mitra pravrttt) fake Fa (Picchila mitra) waar (Pita mutrata) (Prabhiuta mutrata) West WAT (Saruja mitrata) RENE (Madhu meha) vile (Sita meha) Aas sZt (Vataja asmari) frat WARS (Pittaja mitrakrcchra ads FARR (Vataja miitrakrcchra, wt ag \(Sanaira meha) Aen A (Lala meha) sah ae (Udaka meha) BAT SSR ceo (Kamala asaddhya laksana) frat TAGS (Pittaja miutrakrcchra) Tae (Mitra sada) fast Ws (Pittaja pandu) Wg, qaey (Pandu pirvarupa) ferrst wae (Pittaja prameha) Prat waa (Pittaja svarabheda) SMITA (Usna vata) WHK STAG (Pravrddha amavata) WAS Wea TaN (Prameha pratyatma laksana) frat (Sita meha) SHAS (Udaka meha) SRA (Asmari) foast TAGS (Pittaja mitrakrcchra) WA (Mitraksaya) Ray (Miutrotsanga) SMUSAR (Vata kundalika) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 411 eet (Sukla mittrata) WANE (Mittra sada) HbA WS (Kaphaja pandu) . frente (Pista meha) 3a AB (Udaka meha) L\ fame ARASH (Maiijistha meha) IB |__(Visra mitram) HAS (Rakta meha) L | wie HMM (Kamala) , i (Raktapita mutrata) ar WA SIR (Asmari) frst WARS (Pittaja mutrakrcchra} . Taye (Mittra sada) : WAGH (Mitra sanga) fragt SMTA (Pittavrta apa navayu THe (Rakta meha) se centr (Adhoga rakta pitta) SOTAIT (Usna vata) Wand ald (Gudagata vata) Bert seat (Sarkara asmari) (Sarakta miutrata) jeer | Aet atta or UTS atta (Examination of Stool) (Properties of Dosanusara Mala Laksana) Sama purisa laksanads are described indetail in Gma chap- p ter. ait wena ate wet (Properties of mala vitiated by vata) e Dry, hard, blackish discolouration of stools. faa vara cat (Properties of mala vitiated by pitta) e Yellowish discolouration of stools. Se WHIT TAC (Properties of mala vitiated by kapha)
412 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana “-=@. White coloured Stools. free vata wer (Properties of mala vitiated by 3 dosas) .@ Black, loose, yellowish, constipated, whitish coloured stools. ® Foul smell with coldness indicates jirna mata. Properties of mala indicating poor prognosis © Stool passed by a person which is too black, too white, too yellow and too red-definitely kill the patient and patient dies quickly if associated with excessive hotness. sor Gay (Usna purisa)| Fras arf (Pittaja arsa) ST TN (Ama purisa) | AT BRAK (Vataja atisara) ara weftt ¢ Vataja grahani) arent (Samgrahani) STAIR sree cet (Atisdra asddhya laksana) | Saerfar (Samgrahani) (Vataja atisara) areeT get (Aruna purisa) TE Ges (Baddha purisa) ssiol FAT (Ajirna laksana) fasamrsitef ¢ Vistabdhdjirna) BAGH (Alasaka) Gass SATE (Purisaja anaha) at Gaet (Arsa pitrvarupa) aaa arf (Vataja arsa) aT SSM (Vataja asthila) sift qaaq (Atisara purvarupa) ATGERRMMT aTeRT WYK SVAN (Pravrddha amavata)|~ § Rogi Pariksa4 and Roga Pariksa 413 (Vatadusta stanya PGnaja balaroga) USI Bld (Gudagata vata) ey wy (Gulma roga) aaa sat (Antarvega jvara) faa sax (Sannipataja jvara) aT SAL (Vataja jvara) aldd FAM (Kaphavrta samana) ares ara (Kostha$rita vata) AS ATT (Kostha Vrana) qs fief (Purisaja krimi) WS Saey Cray (Pandu asadhya laksana) WHE (Paramada) SAT WROTE (Vataja parinamasiila ) ast we saag (Vataja prameha upadrava) West (Praryasthila) aR eRTS (Sanniruddha guda) SHI WA (Kaphaja Ssitla) . AIS WA (Vataja sila} Fela (Maha svasa) TarpRar (Baddha gudodara) SET TeTT (Udararoga laksana) qos salad (Purisaja uddvarta) SAS Sela (Vataja udavarta) area at (Kosthagata vata) (Vatavyadhi upadrava)
414 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijiiana fasensittt (Vistabdhajirna) aE GIT (Bahu purisa) | AAAK (Atisara) , SA AGA ART (Atisara asadhya laksana) aaefir (Samgrahani) SAA (Atisdra) xa qe (Drava purisa) frat af (Pittaja arSa) arast Feet (Vataja grahani) feast aevit (Pittaja grahani) aaefot (Samgrahani) daeftr (Samgrahani) arast 3st (Vataja arsa) (Grathita purisa) . efta qia Blea (Halimaka) (Harita purisa) aur gig BAT STATA TAT (Krsna purisa) (Kamala asadhya laksana) purdta atte aaa set (Vataja arsa) (Krsnapita purisa) ads tat a (Vataja svarabheda) (Lohita purisa) first SFaR (Pistaja atisara) faa qs (Nila purisa) SVT stare aT (Atisara asadhya laksana) frat sfaanr (Pittaja atisara) fras ref (Pittaja arga) frost aeftt ate (Pittaja grahani dosa Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 415 (Phenila purisa) aa afaar (Vataja atisara) : arast efit S4.(Vataja grahani dosa) fikoa ata ae at (Kaphaja aréa) : (Picchila purisa) aaefit (Samgrahani) Gea gta feast atet (Pittaja arsa) (Pi ta purisata) frst afar (Pittaja atisara) frst neftt aa (Pittaja grahani dosa eles (Halimaka) fFIH FA (Pittaja jvara) BAT STAT. cao (Kamala asadhya laksana) IAC (Kamala) feast Beet (Pittaja mirecha) frrst UWS (Pittaja pandu) ws; qed (Pandu purvarupa) frat ward (Pittaja svarablieda) MAN (Kamala) - (Mrdbhazsanajanya pandu) WS Sas TRITT (Pandu asadhya laksana) AT Stak (Kaphaja atisara) (Vataja atisdra) arast wecit aa cata ya (Rakta pita purisa) ware ate (Sakapha purisa) as wy (Sandra purisa) aes ye (SaSabda purisa)
416— Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana (Vataja grahani dosa) weftr (Samgrahani) ane ate first tet (Pittaja arsa) (Sasrk purisa) IAAT STH AUT (Kamala asadhya laksana) FMT WA WIE (Mridbhaksanajanya pandu) vita aia (Sita purisa) Jeane STAR (Kaphaja atisara) areter (Samgrahani) rear yy BHT sty (Kaphaja aréa) (Slesmayukta purisa) apt safest (Kaphaja atisara) ~ ferer gis STAR STATA Trey (Snigdha purisa) | (Atisara asaidhya laksana) aha 3th (Kaphaja aréa) whe ofa (Kaphaja atisara) ARRAR STAY RATT (AttsGra asGdhya laksana) Bs SAX (Kaphaja atisara) afroas efit ay (Sannipataja grahani dosa) aE (Samgrahani) Rie gis aIdT Sti (Vataja arsa) (Stoka.purisa) Gat ats aos afar (Kaphaja atisara) (Sukla a serad (Udavarta) areas efit ate fore gis (Snigdha purisa) ean purisa) Rogi Pariksa and Roga Pariksa 417 (Sav (Syava Purisa) Pee Ute (Examination by Hearing) TER adsen apeat a fra: | smear edt ara: wacada MMA 1) Yosaratmakara 13 In case of kaphaja vikdra voice becomes heavy. In case of pittaja vikara voice bocomes clear, other than heavy and clear voice indicates vata vitiation. Please refer Srotrendriya pariksa for more detail about §abda pariksa described under sad vidha pariksa. zast ate (Examination by Touch) fra Wit wet arhit a vitcen: 1 Vorntct: a waar: wastada MRA | lYogaramakara P- I3 Hot touch perceived in pittaja rogi. Cold touch perceived in vataja rogi. Moist touch perceived in kaphaja rogi . Please refer sparSanendriya pariksa described ‘under sadvidha pariksa for more detail. qe What (Examination of Eye) Signs and symptoms in eye due to Vataja eye disorders These are dhumra (smoky), aruna (pink), nila (blue), ruksa (dry), cancala (unsteady), antahpravista (sunken), raudra (ter- rifying look) and antarjvdla (glows inside). Signs and symptoms in eye due to Pittaja eye disorders Aruna (pink), haridra (yellow), rakta (red), malina (dirty), tiksna (penetrating), prabhda (lustrous), dipadvesi (photophobic), dahayukta (burning sensation in eye) are the symptomatology observed in pittaja eye disorders.
418 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana Signs and Symptoms of eye due to Kaphaja eye disorders Sveta (white), dhavala (glistening), pluta (watery), snigdha (greasy), sthira (steady), jyotihina (lusterless) kanduyukta (itch- ing). Please refer pratyaksa pariksa, caksurindriya pariksd de- scribed elsewhere in this book for more information about drk pariksa. feat atte (Examination of Tongue) Frat vitet arceaett epizear areas fire | Teal Fann aaftad wh ywsfatakerer 11 Yogaratnakara P-15 In case of vataja vikadra tongiie becomes cold, rough and fissures. In case of pittaja vikdra tongue becomes red, dark blue. In case of kaphaja vikdra tongue becomes white and ex- cessively greasy. In case of Sannipataja vikara tongue becomes black, ul- cerations, fissures, dry. Mixed features observed in dvandvaja vikards. Conditions of Jihvé in various disorders faa fotat FRI STAT TAT (Asita jihva) (Madatyaya asadhya laksana) Ate feet (Nila jinva) | AeA staea Tet (Madatyaya asadhya laksana) frat Frenef gen fas ae _(Jihva niskarsya) (Trsna nirodhaja daha) Rogi Pariks4 and Roga Pariksa 419 gon foes ag (Trsna nirodhaja daha) far era FIST (Jihvastamba) (Jihva stambha) frat SIee Was YAwI (Prameha piirvarupa) (Jihvaupadeha) faa aoa forat we (Jihva sosa) qantas ele (Trsnanirodhaja daha) (Jihva vepana) anepta atten (Akrti Partkga) 3amaq (Aksepa) 3maqH (Aksepaka) SIMA (Apasmara) ‘| Suda (Apatantraka) OTST (Dhanustambha) ardeaMty (Vatavyadhi) siqfea aera Aah stare TRA (Anguli.vakrata) (Vatarakta asadhya laksana) sidiaresra dhery | | THHATA (Tamaka Svasa) (Asinolabhate Saukhyam) aarenrad AHH (Tamaka svasa) (Avadhmayate) sare ee fern stare TTT (Ayamyate deha) (Hikka asadhya laksana) EUPIA Ald (Sndyugata vata) ser ad (Asthigata vata) neftrers yay aeeqa (Balaksaya)
420 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana (Grahani dosa Purvarupa) Bless (Halimaka) TRIN (Jara Sosa) ATs AM (Vataja kasa) ASIA AT (Majjagata vata) WHAT (Rajayaksma) THI (Raktarsa) afar (Siitika roga) Bet WT STaey caT (Udara roga asadhya laksana) SEAT (Urahksata) a wT (Bhagna roga) ATOMS SIRT (Vata vyadhi upadrava) TON TT WTS (Mridbhaksana janya pandu) 2eashcT qefa (Grdhrasi) (Deha vakrata) wat Te TARA (Tamakasvasa) (Griva graha) . ater esa areata year (Griva hundana) (Vatavyadhi purvarupa) Hear eq ACT {SAAT (Yamala hikka) (Griva kampa) . SAT (Kampa) - aes sreftd (Vataja Gmlapitta) SATaa (Ananta vata) ats SUGAR (Vataja apasmara) / aféat yet (Ardita piirvarupa) WA (Bhagna) SRAM (Bhri Stunata) Rogi Pariks4 and Roga Pariksa 421 STS SIZAR (Vataja asmari) GACH fe (Yamala hikka) SRST (Jara Sosa) AAS SAL (Vataja jvara) SMa (Kampa vata) Fella SIXT (Madatyaya upadrava) ast Test (Vataja mirccha) fans Treat (Visaja murccha) SARI TAPS (ASmarija mitra krcchra) Wace SIXT (Pandtyaya upadrava) “AAS UWE (Vataja pandu) aitst URUMA et (Varaja parinamasiila) wafas (Patra visa) ant we soa (Vataja-prameha upadrava) alcent wT (Sutika roga) SOTA AAT AT (Uristhambha asadhya laksana) SR STAT aU (Vatarakta asadhya laksana) fergant (Visicika) aifaa stare wert (Ardita asadhya laksana) at qed (Arga purvarupa) SAR STATET RTT (Atisdra asadhya laksana) weit sree cer area (Karsya)
422 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijaiana HPacd (Kubjatva) (Chardi roga asadhya laksana) TTS STH Caroy (Galaganda asadhya laksana) TRE (Gara visa) ara Felt eS (Vataja grahani (Hikka asadhya laksana) SUNT (Jara Sosa) vat SAE, CRIT (Jvara asadhya laksana) BAST SAL (Kamaja jvara) ae wd yeast oft (Kaphaja evam purisaja krmi) uff (Parigarbhika) TTA (Raktagata vata) MaMa. Sat (Sannipata udara) ast RAST ae (Vataja stanyapanaja balaroga) fora (Chinna §vasa) TN (Trsna) Ten SIA (Trsna upadrava) sara sree HeTUT (Udavarta asadhya laksana) aS SATE (Varaja unmada) RAT (Uraksata) UST (Rajayaksma) Hed . (Kubjatva) STP Ald. (Snayugatavata) artes (Vata vyadhi) Chapter 19 asa utter (Dasavidha Pariksa) WAAL UR BRAT: | Tet atten age: waurredtat ae, TeOMMUTEdal | at Males aetna: ; aromngedt fe dasccnfasacdt sermoifasteatat wera 1 TEM WitreriennaiaanErererngeaadad; 7 ela APTANA AAPA AM AAS AGT AT PLAS TASTE: TGA; areenfertenrerreentes Met TEL WOE Tio EQ: | Weteetel ACOA TATOTT dracmgratrarce Tega aoe asa ATT witad:; fastrag ant, w arafergefagataecagaanr: wre: Gaanisaen: weer | ae actale acrerenfeahord raraat- Hentigermreeta wale | TeTalgt waa welts, faahias, akas, Ges, WATTS, SIA, WaT, Be- wing, wararsiknas, areata, aerrao-fagesrevted: 11 C.Vi. 8/94" It is very much essential to prescribe the therapy to the patient, which constitutes karya deSa or the site for the admin- istration of therapies with a view to bring back the normalcy among dosa, dh@tu etc. The purpose of examination is to ob- tain knowledge regarding the span of life, strength and the in- © tensity of morbidity, because if a physician having not exam- ined properly administers intensely potent drug suddenly, it may kill the patient. Weak patients are incapable of resisting strong therapies like medicaments dominating in agni and vayu. mahabhitas, application of alkalies and heat (cauterization) and . surgical operations. They may cause instantaneous death due ; to unbearable and over intense impulse of the drug. Keeping . this in mind, the physicians should treat the weak patients with drugs which are unharmful, mild, delicate, heavy in progres- sive order. Mild medicaments should be prescribed to ladies because they have unstable, soft, bare and timid heart and they
424 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana are delicate, weak and subordinate to others. In brief, prescribed therapy should not be injurious to the body and mind. Stronger therapies that are neither distressing during their digestion nor associated with serious complications may be administered slowly and gradually. Similarly, if weak therapies are adminis- tered to a strong individual having a serious disease without proper examinatioh, the disease does not get cured. Hence, the patient should be examined in respect of Prakrti (constitution), vikrti (morbidity), sdra (excellence of dhatus), sarnhanana (compactness of organs), pramdna (measurements of the or- gans of the body), satmya (suitability), satva (psychic condi- tions), Ghdra Sakti (power of intake and digestion of food), vyayama Sakti (power of performing exercise) and vayas (age- ing) in order to ascertain his strength and the intensity of the morbidity. Thus the strength of individuals can be classified depend- ing ‘upon the surperiortity, mediocrity and inferiority of the above mentioned factors, viz. prakrti, sara etc., except vikrti. Three types of the strength of the dosds are inferred from the three types of the intensity of morbidity. Thereafter, (de- pending upon the nature of the dos@s involved, three types of medicaments, viz. strong, mild.and moderate should be admin- istered. With a view to ascertaining the life span of an indi- vidual, symptoms described in Indriyasthdna and also in the 8° chapter of Sarirasthdna must be taken into account. Ten fold examinations should be done to understand the overview condition of the person in order to carry out scientifi- cally and methodically therapeutic treatment in a systematic planned manner to get desirable and satisfying successful re- sults. Vikyti partksa, which helps to elicit the factors which are responsible for the genesis of disease. wala (Prakrti) TA Wears] War yemenea4a: | qeron-—epreitfiraafi, carerrmigepid, ungrentrerapti, ergy Dasavidha Pariksa 425 Tisrtatard | unt fe a4-aa AaoneaaaAa aT Mae, aaa ate TH SITET ae: ar et atep freer cial tfaq, WaEt: asfeq, HOTA: faa | aai fe aro CART: 11 C.Vi. 8/95 Gereniarrdata at adele zene: | wefastat aa ae A Hat OT 1) S.8a. 4/63 It is the inherent characteristic property of an individual refers to the genetically determined physical and mental make up. It is determined by (a) sperms and ovum; (b) season and condition of the uterus; (c) food and regimens of the mother, and (d) nature of mahabhutas comprising the foetus. The foetus gets afflicted with one or more of the two dosas, which are dominantly associated with the above mentioned factors. Dosas dominating the sperms and ovum during the time of concep- tion and also those inhabiting the uterus at that time determine the prakrti of the individual. Food and regimens of the mother, which aggravates dosds at that time also determine the physical constitution. The dosds that ultimately emerge as dominant fac- tors actually determine the prakrti. Season also indirectly serve as important factors for the determination of prakrti in as much as they also aggravate dosds in the sperms and ovum. According to some other texts of medicine, prakrti of an individual is determined on the basis of the condition of the sperms and ovum. wat TET waka —aa: gery faded 1 S.8&. 4/61 Seven types of Saririka prakrti has been deséribed namely kaphaja, pittaja, vataja, vata pittaja, vata kaphaja, kapha- pittaja and sannipataja prakrti’s. Characteristic diagnostic parameter for the determination of deha prakrti are as follows. - 29Vik. & Roga
426 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijiiana pert waht Slesmaja Prakrti) are: | Wea Geraseirent: fearengy:, yeTanaregpiewng:, AMS SHAT THA: eae aaC A abt aT WeayoTa- TREAT Geta tyre feat Shakar: Vea SEV ata) C.Vi. 8/96 agate walt 11 yecna: ferpiconfertersynt cattery see- qegfaeeia: | Gr: cancer dake a Tear, THF Tere: dass: fereesfa: cequigs: | ever afar weu Fat serewmHheyper: 11 Teyana: fertmaen: ufomwe far weatfa ag 1 aftPisrcacrane: aa WRAAS ws WaT A Ve || KaERsTaE: erata- Mae: | atet- GA- TART: VATA AT S.Sa, 4/72-76 yeer da: yas dent yeerahusueatern: | eg: Gaertn. Gan aw: Ta: TTA: 11 frengqater- arose witerrragactatt: 1 weramg: yyittaen ‘“Aeretenet ethernet: ul Wes: wagfanmeredd aghikfreayegaye: | anten aefa 3 frat a ag sees sete ee fat wae 1 emreteeaeraa wereriimeg tigers: | eaferatiretrrary ferttet a a areas cafecient a eiter: uN fra word aecaloreaned a yen serarermsti | Tartgfarafagnentd: = «- qeanyecnfaraenena: 11 Dasavidha Pariksa 427 amen: mengehnt ddesif aera: oral Teait: wea: arate Farqdtga: wart: 11 Tegan: yomst al qeor ferdrees | wn wauruaagaent wera agai drei it TESS TASMAN: 1 POH CAAA Feeraritg’: 11 A.Hr.8a. 3/96-103 | Physical Characteristics— t. Unctuous and smooth, even, well defined and good look- ing body. 2. Pleasing appearance with delicate and fair organs. 3. Excellent, compact and firm ‘body. 4. Possesses deep seated, unctuous and well knit joints and muscles, 5. Dullness in action and initiation with less activities. 6. Firm stable gait due to uniform pressing of feet on earth. 7. Have long arms, big and elevated chest with big fore- head. 8. Thick and blue hair. 9. Eyes are red at the angles, unctous, wide, Jong with well designed white and black spheres of eye parts with hav- ing more eyelashes. 4 f) Physiological 1. Due to abundant sukra there will be excessive desire for sexual act and will be having more children and at- tendants. 2. Are not much troubled by hunger, thirst, unhappiness, strain, heat, perspiration. : astringent, pungent, hot, dry and less in quantity. (Still remain strong) 3. More desire in tastes and consume food which is bitter, ~
428. Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 4. Voice is clear, high pitched melodious. 5. Less desire for foods and drinks but like sweet things. Psychological Characteristics 1. Endowed with intelligence, right attitude, truthfulness, strength, wealth, knowledge, energy, peace, courage and longevity. 2. Righteous, benevolent nature, do not speak hard and abusive words. 3. Horbour enemity, concealed and deep for long time. Possess good: memory, perseverance, humbleness, do not -weep much even in childhood. Free from greediness and have less speech and anger. Endowed with foresight and munificience. Have faith in god. . anrnrnn Dignified, greatly charitable, civilized, slow, grateful, straight forward, learned, bashful, obedient to teach- ers and elders, forgiving nature and good at heart. 9. In dreams he sees water reservoirs with full of water, lotus, birds and clouds and pleasing to the mind in ‘dream. 10. Slow in understanding. 11. Predominant in satvaguna. 12. Grants gifts in plenty after considering the receiver. 13. Speaks well selected words and séntences. 14. These persons imitate in their activities like Brahma, Rudra, Indra,. Varuna and animals such as lion, horse, elephant, cow, oull, red eagle and swan. ferast wenld (Pittaja Prakrti Characteristics) _ teaqui tet ad faernei aah a 1 medion fret waxgem- Ue, SONRE:, YPARaTe:, wydiacgonphrctser:, afer Dasavidha Pariksa 429 ara 1 C.Vi. 8/97 frafa:-aet ofa: dtafnfrengenmra-ae- ard- frars-urftt-urgaet geht aciaferrantrenget sey sordet faratarerel neamaet Rerrege wate 11 Aer Prgorataaerer arnt tated uftiag ghar: Get: Ue areh- vere Hiren waraafe a gareifeegeat: 1 A rere woe: worterfe arerarefa | dade del cafarreniit: a watee frre: 11 WaH- errata: | cmmeteerys: Ahrenreg at: wat: 11 S.8&. 4/68-71 frat afediast at ace firificeeitenemaga: | TMI ETACETSas: WR Ue esas eT afarneniacrss: yatta: eferafnraect: | Oat: Usaeafolanraenrsi wa fat went det wacccemfit fraftrarfir | wet Wet Tat ae Wi aseary, facitert 11 Ferg = =—|- HEAT: after = eererefiza: | eorafen frrratraengentsr Ofer: 11 A.Hr.S&. 3/90-95 Physical Characteristics 1. White and warm body.
430 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana 2. Possess coppery red palms, soles and face. 3. Have brown and scanty hair. 4. . Possesses loose and lean joints and muscles. 5. Possesses grey hair, wrinkles and blue patches in skin and baldness. 6. Eyes are thin, brown, unsteady with thin and few eye- lashes. 7. Eyes becoming red very quickly by anger, after drink- ing wine and exposure to sunlight. 8. Body parts are yellowish and flabby. Copper coloured nails, eyes, palate, tongue, lips, palms and soles. 10. He is ugly and has moderate strength. Physiological 1. Have excellent thirst and anger. Consume food which is sweet, astringent, bitter and cold. Hate sunlight and hot things. Perspire heavily, emits bad smells from the body. Expel large amount of faecal matter. Eats great amount of foods and drinks heavily. Strong digestive power. 2 NAKA YWN Putrid smell from axilla, mouth, head and body in ex- cess. Moderate span of. life. 10. Insufficiency of semen, sexual desire, procreation and do not like women. 11. Always in troubles like ulceration in mouth ete. Psychological Characteristics 1. Becomes angry quickly and gets relived of it quickly. 2. Intelligent, clever, defeats others in talk, brilliant, undefeatable in assemblies. Dasavidha Pariksa 431 3. Moderate spiritual, materialistic knowledge and wealth. 4. Are brave and proud and not soft towards the surren- dered. 5. Desirous of consoling and granting gifts to those who are obedient. 6. These people are fond of 5 women, garland and un- guents. 7. Possesses good behavior, clean, affectionate to depen- dents. 8. Have more anger and jealousy. In dreams he sees the flowers of karnikdra, palasa (both are red in colour), forest fire, lightening (than- der bolt), meteor, bright sunrays and fire. 10. Eyes desirous of cold comfort. 11. These persons imitate their activities and behavior with animals like tiger, bear, ape, cat, snake, owl, monkey and mungoose, gandharva and yaksa. anna weal (Vataja Prakrti Characteristics) aM Raereeragyiaettreafegae: | Ae Ceaser SMAI: WATASHI STRATA Welfed, AAMAS ERATE: PeraetaherrersafaryE ates - farrier, agave vetfrarar:, yas TARTAN: VRAIN: sens cra, Prrerast- arefeora: wedayiteeoern:, USS TET sTyAgia- GQAaA- ASM: AMEN Apleayara: Taare yA T TCT Talat 11 - C.Vi: 8/98 wa alee: marree: vice gin: et serdar Tradiard: Upledanterni-swasaagrads: sale (sareittt Wert ‘enrsitet:’) erat a vafti seafieqerited:
432° Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiina Peet: HeaSM eceica: wet 1 Eras aakternan Prat a treater Hee Usa Yat: 1 serahermftscefraarrras- weratra: | ferfsee farce mrearphite Aer: 11 ST TESTSTAATTETERTA A | TSAR: ae S.8a. 4/64-67 srdvo wa cede ger deme: Geren viefarsrereairesitgicceriterigiiacads reagent: 11 3 yar a featiaen 3 araf aa areal AEN aT 11 vorfin Sat wegeafin qarrerefit gaen | sierra vara et Hegriet 71 nas soe Te TET arfaaat: 11 - A.H.Sa. 3/84-89 Physical Characteristics 1. Body is cracked and dusky. 2. Mustaches, nails, hairs are scanty and rough. 3. Thin body with prominence of veins all over the body and tall in shape. 4. Unctuousness, emaciation and dwarfness of the body. 5. Light and inconsistent gait, action and movement. 6. Unstable joints; eyes, eyebrows, jaws, lips, tongue, head, shoulder, hands and legs. 7. . Production of cracking sounds in joints when they move. 8. Eyes are rough, lusterless, round, unpleasant and re- semble those of dead. 9. Lids kept open while sleeping. 10. Dasavidha Pariksa 433 Unsteady vision and movements. 11. Abundance in tendons. 12. Possesses little strength. Physiological Characteristics Hate cold, often getting afflicted with cold, shivering and stiffness. - Voice is obstructed, interrupted, unsteady or harsh, long drawn, broken, dry low. Desirous of habituation to sweet, sour, salty and hot foods and eat light food: Psychological Characteristics : Unsteady in respect of courage, memory, thinking, friendship, movement. Very talkative and speaks irrelevantly. Possess little of wealth, span of life and sleep. He is cruel, ungreateful. Quick in walk and wanders too much. Unsteady in mind. Quick in initiating actions, getting irritated. Quick in the onset of morbid manifestations and fear. Quick in likes and dislikes. . Quick in understanding and forgettirig things. . These people are atheists, gluttons, pleasure seeking. . Desirous of music, humor, hunting or gambling. . Are not steadfast, cannot control their senses, not civi- lized, not liked by women, not have many children. . Has disorganized mind and unsteady vision. . In dreams they sees as if they are moving in the sky, roaming in the mountains, dwelling on trees. . These people are non-magnanimous, bloated with jeal- ously of stealing nature and having bulged calves.
434 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana 17, They imitate the animals in their behavior like goat, dog, goyalox, rabbit, jackal, camel, vulture, crow, don- key. aertst wafta (Saemsargaja Prakrti) aalat frgot asia ward gq cart: 1 ; Tren cenit da: wad fates 11 S.Sa. 4/77 weak, GgETtaN: 11 “C.Vi. 8/99 vinfereraehaad qehforrided 11 A.H.SG. 3/104 Mixed features observed in vata kapha, vata pitta, kapha pitta and vata pitta kapha prakrti (sama prakrti) individuals. aa wala (Sama Praksti Persons) werner Wawa: | C.Vi. 8/100 Sama prakrti persons possesses all excellent qualities of all dhatus. diireat werrenye wenht (Bhautikt Paficamahabhiita Prakrti) Fee Sat Ser: Geraeraa: aired fea: | feer-fageenth: affes ennarpgyferce faresitet arva: highs: i S.Sa. 4/80 Prakyti arise from five elements i.e. pancamahabhitas are as follows— One each from 1. Pavana (vata) 2. Dahana (agni and pitta) 3. Toya (apa/slesma) 4. Prthvi All the above are characterised by strong and big body and able to withstand troubles. 5. Nabha (Akasa) manifests features like cleanliness and long life. Dasavidha Pariksa 435 are weft (Manasa Prakrti) In this majority of the features pertain to the mind and mental activities of the person. Due to their resemblance in qualities to that of almighty god names were designated ac- cordingly. Totally 16 types of m@nasika prakyti’s are described. L. takers art are WeHla— 7 (Satvika Kaya Manasa Prakrti) viemiteraaearent aay TST | frofiaatieat a werErer mari med viking a aad = eerie) wart wT ait me TATA I Braet PATTON 1 Sieur. | renner wat PHTAATL a Fea-arfest- sara 1 eter aa omer = raetaery | wert «oaékart «fief: 9 apfrenegfer: 1 Waar 1 waa eafeaeat: ATE: Ut S.Sa. 4/81-88 1, Sea 2. WK BI 3. Fey HE 4. Ha Wa 5. Wed ae 6. aa wa aiftacs Ta (Satvika Kaya)-7 in number 2. HEA (Brahmakaya) The features of Brahmakaya are as follows—
436 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiidna Dasavidha Pariksa 437 e: Cleanliness © Worshipping © Belief in God © Indulging in fire sacrifices e Scriptures : e Purity, love for truth e Regular practice of vedas &. ST Ae (HT) [Yamya Satva (Kaya)] The features of Yamya kaya are as follows— Performance of right actions with strong determination Full of courage Excellent memory Cleanliness 2. ARH (Mahendra Kaya) Devoid of passion - - Delusion Features of Mahendra kaya are as follows— © Infatuation and hatredness * Glory . = © Courage 9. safe west (era) [Rsi Satva (Kaya)] © Commanding Features of Rsi Satva are as follows— e Vows 3. Faull are (Varuna Kaya) © Celibacy Features of Varuna kaya are as follows— e Fire sacrifice e Study of scriptures e Possessed with general and special knowledge 1. -URra ara are TaHf—6 Ta Frater a weet Wf a yt wenquar wait = dlafte—(airafere ‘at.’) I age Trees tararnfat te ave arnsfad ae Rerracart ee wagered Wet we aI smduisvacardt vied = carereveror 1 apr TE (Leet UT.) AEM eeeaERT | yeaa Tare BTaeTaTOTT 1 shescrena ert ureetirrt ae | aici Feist ere Hreetery 1 ardfaannreret q epitergaany | e Desire for cold © Forbearance © Colour of the body, eyes and hairs are brownish in colour © Speaks affectionately %. HAL FA (Kubera Kaya) The features of Kubera kaya are as follows— e Adoptance of middle path in all activities © Capacity to withstand difficulties © Aquisition of wealth © Capacity to produce many offsprings. 4. Ter Ta (Gandharva Kaya) The features of Gandharva Kaya are as follows— e Fondness towards perfumes and garlands © Desirous of dance and playing musical instruments © Likes to visit various Picnic spots.
A i iksa , 439 438 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiaéna & Roga Vijiiana Dasavidha Pariksa eed owt oie fei e Terrifying look wa eT k= e Jealous . : SAT: V1 Sa. 4/88-94 e Violating the stipulated norm 1. SRR Act 2. wt we e Flattering himself greatly 3. MH FF 4. Uae ae u. fag ara (ara) [Pisaca Kaya (Satva)] 5. fora ae 6. ST He 2. ATA GM (aed) (Asura Kaya (Satva)] The features of Pisaca kaya are as follows— Intake of food which has been discarded by others - : e Cruelty The features of Asura kaya are as follows— e Fond of adventures e Full of wealth e Desirous of women e Terrifying look e Lack of shyness ° Courageous &, aesta (Hea) [Preta Kaya (Satva)] ° Angry The features of Preta kaya are as follows— « Jealous e Likes to take food in loneliness e Doesn’t share anything with others © Consumes large quantity of food * Lazyness . e Always full of grief 2. wd wre (Gra) (Sarpa Kaya (Satva)] e Jealous The features of Sarpa kaya are as follows— e Sensuous e Quick in actions © Doesn’t give anything to others e Gets tired quickly IL. ant wre AE wefa—3 e Fearful : e Angry TATE freiter a1 e Deceiving qed wat ot ae Septhrea ' e Unsteady frrafter aa fade: wetar WoW: 11 e Desirous of recreation smakeuan dre died aferentiari Wena «= ART TUT encaraTfarerEnt aaet Ti | armen «=e: «Ss GaeTMentarefafray 1! gad fifae: arr: wker a area | erat vader waypact feat ata HeMpdaeaat TAT PA: | wet cman: wea aa fase 1 S.Sa. 4/94-99 3. WEA Bra (Ua) /Sakuna Kaya (Satva)] The features of Sakuna kaya are as follows— e Indulging in sexual pleasures in excess e Consumes food without break © Impatient e Roaming around constantly %. Tata BA (Act) (Raksasa Kaya (Satva)] The features of Raksasa kaya are as follows— © Understands things without others support
440 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijiiina 1. Wy Wea 2. Wee We 3. AAT a 2. WY Bla (Aca) (Pasu Kaya (Satva)] The features of Pasu kaya are as follows— e Bad thinking e Sluggish activities e Dreams everyday as indulging in copulation @ Denies everything 2. Akt Ha (Wa) (Matsya Kaya (Satva)] The features of Matsya Kaya are as follows— e@ Unsteadiness Idiotism Desire for water Fighting with one another 3. AMeIet ara (Aa) /Vanaspatya Kaya (Satva)] The features of Vanaspatya kaya are as follows— eee e Always likes to sit in one particular place e Consumes food oftenly e@ Doesn’t follow truthfulness and righteousness e@ Devoid of lust and wealth HEMT TH: OT: | Bat: t whet Tarot: waters ar fren s.$a 4/98-99 After proper understanding of kaya prakrti’s one should initiate appropriate therapy. Mahaprakrti’s are those which manifests due to influence of satva, raja and tama and knowl- edge of the constitution is very much essential. ae wea fret eet wee: wee | Tart, areas ferder sect 11 K.S.Su 28/89 Three types of psyche are described to be born from vir- tue, anger and delusion these are said to be superior, medium Dasavidha Pariksa 44] and inferior respectively. Eight, seven and three respectively are said to be the types of these psyche. To prescribe medi- cines, knowledge of this is essential. Description of Manasa Prakrtiin Caraka Samhita Bei aq Aa-Iz, Tare, TPP | A SARITA <1 C. $4 4/36 The psyche is of three types—Suddha, rajas and tamasa. The fuddha is said to be devoid of defects due to having ben- eficial fraction, whereas rdjasa and tadmasa are defective be- cause of the fractions of agitation and ignorance respectively. Out of these three types of psyche, each one has got innumer- able subdivisions due to relative degrees and variations in in- teraction of psyche and body according to species. Body fol- lows psyche and vice versa. Hence some of the types of psyche are described here as illustrations by showing their similarity with some well-known symbols. Bpe waft (Suddha Prakrti) Steal Aca [Brahmya Satva (Sharing the Traits of Brahma)] f vast eared erat ipeatentaratitd ae whee are fare | C. $& 4/36 (01) 1. Purity, Jove for truth, self-controlled. 2. Power of discrimination, material and spiritual knowledge. 3. Power of exposition, reply and memory. 4, Devoid of passion, anger, greed, ego, ignorance, jeal- ousy, dejection and intolerance. 5. Favorable disposition equally for all creatures. 30 Vik. & Roga
442 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfana & Roga Vijiiana amg art [Arga Satva (Sharing the traits of Rsis)] sfumremtaariaercoriiedcannd fre! C. $4 4/36 (02) 1. Devotion to sacred rituals, study, sacred vows, obla- tions and celibacy. 2. Devoted to guests. 3. Freedom from pride, ego, attachment, hatred, igno- rance, greed and anger. 4. Intellectual excellence and eloquence. 5. Endowed with power of understanding and retention. WH tea [Aendra Satva (Sharing the traits of Indra)] taieadaared sar ypuiattet dsretnatercreaArat defer aatiarntrats fared 1 C. Sa 4/36 (03) . Lord-ship and authoritative speech.- . Performance of sacred rituals. ; . Bravery, strength ‘magnificent and impressive appearance . Freedom from mean acts. . Fore sightedness. . Devotion to virtuous acts, earning of wealth and proper satisfaction of desires. ANAWNH area Gest [Yamya Satva (Sharing the traits of Yama)] erenMeatgaite are frend | C. $a 4/36 (04) . Observance of the ‘propriety of actions. . Acting in opportune moment _ . Non-violability. . Readiness for initiating action. . Memory and lordship. . Freedom from attachment, envy, hatred and ignorance. AupAwn- qeut wet Af Varuna Satva (Sharing the traits of Varuna)) C, S& 4/36 (05) Dasavidha Pariksa 443 1. Bravery, patience, purity and dislike for impurity. 2. Observance of religious rites. 3. Fondness for acquatic sports. 4. Aversion for mean-acts. 5. Exhibition of anger and pleasure in proper place. malay eal {Kaubera Satva (Sharing the traits of Kubera) J wrariainaktarcas efeterabrea yt wate SRS HAT fre | C. Sa 4/36 (06) 1. Possession of position, honour, luxuries and attendants. 2. Constant liking for virtuous acts, wealth and satisfac- tion of desires. 3. Purity 4. Liking for pleasures of recreation. 5. Manifest anger and favour. Tred aa /Gandharva Satva (Sharing the traits of Gandharya)] Rregeniitariqaieriacn seaTeMeaeErRaTay Eyre TTA TERT Ta eT virerel ferent | C. $a-4/36 (07) _1. Fondness for dancing, singing, music and praise. , 2. Expertness in poetry, stories, historical narrations and epics, 3. Constant fondness for scents, garlands, unguents, ap- ~ parel, association of women and passion. seed Yard wees maieel Sate fren eeawtigeand; AAT TAA STAT | C. Sa 4/37 Of the seven types of satvika mental faculties described above, the one likened to Brahma is the purest: - urtltes wepfet (Rajasika Prakrti) The rdjasika type of mental faculty represents wrathful dis- position and is of six types. Their characteristic features are furnished in the statement given below-:
444 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana SE Ara [Asura Satva (Sharing the traits of Asura)] WR casa eclatatres Ue yea TTT ATL RIT | C. Sa 4/37 (01) 1. Bravery, cruelty, envy, lordship, movement in disguise, terrifying appearance and ruthlessness. 2. Indulgence in self-praise. Tare ea [Raksasa Satva (Sharing the traits of Ra&ksasa)] rauren aageritel tart fem 1 C. $4 4/37 (02) 1. Intolerance, constant anger,violence at weak points, cruelty, gluttonous habit and fondness for non-vegetar- ian food. 2. Excessive sleep and physical exertions. 3. Envious disposition. Oger Wea [Paisaca Satva (Sharing the traits of Pigaca) 4 i avi wt ft effet ofits sitefraré feapafeentensite tert fren | C. $4 4/37 (03) . Gluttonous habit. . Fondess for women. . Liking for staying with women in lonely place. . Unclean habits, disliking for cleanliness. - Cowardice and terrifying disposition. - Resorting to abnormal diet and regimens. DAnABRWN — ae eat [Sarpa Satva (Sharing the traits of Sarpa or Snake) Fes at os ; f — fant C. Sa 4/37 (04) : - 1. Bravery when in wrathful disposition and timid. otherwise. 2. Sharp reaction. 3. Excessive indolence. 4. Walking, taking food and resorting to other regimens with a-fearful disposition. Dasavidha Pariksa 445 Wet Bea [Preta.Satva (Shariizg the traits of Preta)] ta fear C. Sa 4/37 (05) 1. Excessive desire for food. ; 2. Troublesome conduct, behaviour and management. 3. Enviousness. 4. Actions without discrimination, excessive greediness . and inaction. Bept Met [Sakuna Satva (Sharing the traits of a Sakuni or bird)] : : fs arraf ; : . +f | C. $a 4/37 (06) 1. Attachment with passion, 2. Constantly indulged in food and pass times 3. Unsteadiness, ruthlessness and unacquisitiveness. amften wala (Tamasika Prakrti) The tamasika type of mental faculty represents ignorant disposition and is of thrée types. Their characterisitc features are furnished in the statement given below: Ulla Ue (/Pasava Satva (Sharing the traits of Pasava)] fra tert sft e3 . ai +f ' C. $a 4/38 (01) 1. Forbidding disposition. 2. Lack of intelligence. 3. Hateful conduct and food habit. 4. Excessive sexual indulgence and sleep. Aa aca [Matsya Satva (Skaring the traits of a fish) A fier si a : areca Fore | C. $a 4/38 (02)
446 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 1. Cowardice, unwise, greediness for food, unsteadiness, constant passionate and anger. 2. Fondness for constant-movement and desire for water ana Ua (Vanaspatya Satva (Sharing the traits of vegetable life)] C. S@ 4/38 (03) Idle, indulgence in food, deficiency of all the intellectual faculties and devoid of body actions. C. $a 4/39 Ignorance is common feature among all types of t@masa satva. Innumerability of the types of mental faculties : yaaeaatar Tans cart Yeasset carwaa:, (eet tera wales saitioranaenrpacrediaragaur, Tere Uefaet crafter ee aT, aT fie: arererRaRayeO, Bet w AERA: TE | C. $a 4/40 The three types of mental faculties have innumerable: va- rieties. The satvika type of mental faculty is of seven types de- pending upon the dispositions of Brahma, Rsi, Indra, Yama, Varuna, Kubera and Gandharva. The rajasa type of mental fac- ulty is of six types depending upon the dispositions of Asura, Raksasa, Pisaéca, Sarpa, Preta and Sakuni. The tamasa type of mental faculty is of three types depending upon the disposi- lito of pasu (animal), matsya (fish) and vanaspati (vegetable ive}. . All these descriptions are made with a view to indicate the general mode of treatment that should be provided for. these types of persons. Dasavidha Pariksa 447 2. faanfa atten (Vikrti Pariksa-Examination of Morbidity) . eit-Aa-arer-TeaNahigas Tha, AEA Fee sees eairorcfesrtiaeiar: | mee fe aneleia- senate Brer- ACTA C.Vi. 8/101 Morbid manifestations of the diseases must be examined. in respect to hetu, dosads, disyds, prakrti, desa, kala, bala, laksana. Without determining the strength of the causative fac- tors it is not possible to obtain the knowledge regarding the intensity of the disease. : Contributory factors of the disease like dosas, dusyas, prakrti, desa, kala, bala of the individual resemble that of the disease in quality and the causative factors and symptoms are too strong and numerous leading to manifestation of acute con- dition otherwise mild disease. If either of dosds, dusyas, prakrti, dega etc. If there is similarity in disease quality, causative fac- tors and symptoms of the disease are of moderate nature. lead- ing to manifestation of moderate diseases. a In brief Vikrti Pariksa refers to morbidity of the suscep- tible individual and it also helps to ascertain the strength of the pathogenetic factors responsible for the manifestation of dis-- ease and also helps to predict the prognosis of the disease. Contributory factors for the development of disease (samprapti ghatakas) are as follows. Dosa . Vata -— Samanavata Vyanavata Pranavata Apanavata Udanavata
448 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiidna Pitta. ~ Pacakapitta Bhrajakapitta Rafijakapitta Sdadhakapitta ; Alocakapitta Kapha~ Tarpaka kapha : Bhodakakapha Slesmakakapha Avalambakakapha Kledakakapha ’ Assessment of _and ksaya of dosds snoet be amie ane @ravyatah vrddni Diisya Saptadhdatu Upadhatu Mala — Saririka mala ‘—» Saptadhatu mala Agni Jatharagni + Manda; Visama, Tiksna Dhatvagni'— Manda, Visama, Tiksna Bhitagni —» Manda, Visama, Tiksna Ama Jatharagnijanya Dhatvagnijanya Bhutagnijanya. Srotas Srotodusti Sangha Vimargagamana Atipravriti Siragranthi Dasavidha Pariksa 449 Saftcarasthana Vyaktasthana Udbhavasthana Svabhava Prabhava Sadhyata-asadyata Rogamarga Rogabheda . 3. He Ute (Examination of Sara) aregreast faye aqEert | Cakrapani SRA areas yea aeraesearaqaerse; TT TERHUTAA seesaw | C.Vi. 8/102 Sara (Examination of essence of all dh@tus)— The pur- est of dha@tus which are of best quality. It is defined as the dhatus based on deha prakrti (biophysical constitution) de- pending upon the predominance of particular dha@tu in re- spect of good quantity. The physical and physiopsy- chological characteristics of different sara, described in texts are the reflection of states of dhdtu sara, in the form of struc- ture and functions. It is defined as tissue vitality, tissue qual- ity, as tone of system, constitutional essence, as essence or excellence or purity of dhatu, as stamina. According to mod- ern knowledge s@ra can be considered as the optimum de- gree of genetic code of an individuals DNA with respect to particular dhatu. Genetic code is the system of storage of genetic information’s in chromosomes of living cells that instruct the machinery for polypeptide synthesis to insert a particular amino acid in response to the nucleotide sequence of genetic material. : In our, body every individual’s DNA has the different genetic codes. So, we can say, the quality of dhatus of ev- ery individual will depend upon the genctic code of the individual’s DNA. If the genetic code of the individual’s
450 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana DNA with respect to that dk&tu is optimum, the formation of the particular dhaiu in the body will be of very good qual- ity. Sarva sGra purusa has the optimum degree of the genetic | code with respect to all dhdtus. Individuals on the basis of sara have been classified into various categories depending upon the predominance and qual- ity of particular dhatu in the body, except the satva sara, which is based on predominance of satva (psychic factor) in the body. S. |Caraka |Suéruta | Astanga Astanga | Kaégyap j Brihat NojSamhita | Samhita | Sarngraha Hrdaya | Samhita | Samhita reas Satva Tvak Tvak Tvak Meda Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara 2. |Rakta |Sukra_ | Rakta Rakta Rakta_— | Majja . Sara Sara Sara Sara | Sara Sara Pesos Majja | Marnsa |Mamsa | Mamsa | Tvak Sara |Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara ES ES n an a> sthi |Meda_ | Asthi Asthi Asthi Sukra ara Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara forse | Mamsa | Majja Majja Majja Rudhir Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara Sukra |Rakta | Sukra Sukra Sukra Mainsa Sara Sara ara Sara Sara Sara Satva |Tvak Satva Satva Oja Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara ; Note— The Sara Typology, the rasa sara is not described directly and its is described as tvak sara, probably due to the ~] , eda jAsthi Meda Meda Meda Asthi . ara Sara Sara Sara Sara Sara Dasavidha Pariksa 451 reason that rasa dhdtu are primarily and best manifested in the tvak. Dalhana clarifies in his commentary that in tvak sara, the meaning of tvak is the rasa residing in tvak. Importance of Sara-— \t is remarkable that Ayurvedic acaryas have mentioned ‘sara’ for the assessment of bala and ayu of the patient. Bala means biological strength or power of resistance against the diseases; it can be correlated with the immunity of the individual. As the predominance of particular dhatu, the number of dhatu sara present in the body of an indi- vidual will be directly proportional to the power of resistance of an individual. That’s why sarva sara individual have rela- tively higher resistance in comparison to madhkyama and avara (sara) individuals. The person possessing all the saras but pre- dominating in one will possess more resistance against the dis- eases that may arise due to its absence. It can be recognized that the person of particular sara will have more resistance against the disease produced by the par- ticular dhatu. This view was supported by KaSyapa Samhita, i.e., tvak sara children have disease free tvak and their skin is capable of rapid healing of wounds. Significance of Sara Examination we 7 Phaayhres RresyeeMeeaEar, SMTETTT: Bea, Aeaviss wea, saaeusNaeraaet ste; ead Peas: HeMAa sea: ; war fieterarmecnad fakes: | SAS TT: WAAL C.Vi. 8/115 Caraka has emphasized that sometimes the physicians may take a wrong decision only by seeing the body of the patient such as strong because of being corpulent; weak because of leanness, very weak because of possessing small body. But re- alistically it is observed that some persons: possess small body and leanness but they are strong. They are like ants that have small body and look emaciated but can carry too heavy a load. . Big and corpulent persons may have less strength than the lean and short body, like elephant having big and corpulent body possessing less strength that the lean and short bodies lion.
452 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana The eight subtypes of ‘sara may be assessed in terms of relative quality i.e., sarva sara purusa/pravara sara purusa (superior), madhyama sara (moderate) and asara/avara (infe- rior). The characteristic Properties are as follows:— Bea A TAT AC YH (Sarva Sara/Pravara Sara Purusa) C.Vi. 8/111 These persons have all the dhatus in abundance and of good quality. They are endowed with great biological strength, absolute happiness, endurance against difficulties, self confi- dence in all enterprises, inclination, benevolent acts, firm and balanced body, well balanced gait, nature of voice is resonant, unctuous, serious and high pitched happiness, supremacy, wealth, enjoyments, honour, delay of ageing, low degree of "pathogenesis, minimum diseases, numerous offspring’s of iden- tical qualities and longevity, presence of great respect, hope of success in all activities, capacity of with standing troubles, wis- dom and steadiness. Tea A Yet (Madhyama Sara Purusa) wearai wea: arefestaeporester carer sata 11 CVE. 8/113 Moderate amount of different sdra Possess qualities of re- spective s@ras in moderate degree and shows characteristic of Sarva sara moderately. STAT Al Bazan Yee (Asara/Avara Sara Purugsa) art faatiarcermn: 1 C.Vi. 8/112 These persons having least amount of different sara, pos- Dasavidha Pariksa 453 sess qualities of respective saras in lowest degree and show none or least characteristics of sarva sara. So, all 8 subtypes of sara must be analysed as sarva sara, madhyama sara and avara sara by routine clinical examinations. TAG UT Fee (Tvak Sara Purusa) Wrage wera faenfeft aai 1 S.Su. 35/16 Tarintedt art weet: | Wea: AT WE TRA: YATE: 11 KS Su. 28/37 wa ferascanereagqenrnrmingqaaneian wea a medreargen are = C.Vi 9/103 Physical Characteristics , 1. Have unctuous, smooth, soft, clear, fine, less numer- ous, deep rooted and tender hair along with lustrous skin. 2. Skin and hairs are good looking and soft. 3. Clear and sharp features in relation to lustre and com- plexion . Physio-psychological Characteristics 1. Endowed with happiness, good fortunes, power, enjoy-- ment, intellect, knowledge, health, excitement and lon- gevity. 2. Pleasure seeking. 3. Free from skin diseas 4. Wounds heal quickly. THAR Fer (Raktasara Pursusa) i farrermant stresnisteay THAR | A UN Taped Ae wafers diearritaht- amare Uae 1 C.Vi. 8/104 fereaseratae- frahourtiraredet THA | S.Su. 35/16 Physical Characteristics 1. Ears, eyes, face, tongue, nose, lips, sole of the hands
454 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana and feet, nails, forehead and genital organs are red in . colour, beautiful dazzling appearance along with unctousness. 2. Unctuous and coppery red coloured nails, eyes, palate, tongue, lips, palms and soles. Physio-psychological Characteristics 1. These individuals endowed with happiness, great ge- nius, enthusiastic, tender. : . 2. Moderate strength and inability to face difficult situa- tions. 3. Their body remains hot. are ae Gea (Mamsa Sara Purusa) fart faa. qaaniaanthd aemgs dined I CWE. 87105 akemnet qereratr aidtataas ae S.Su. 35/16 1. Stable, heavy, compact, beautiful, handsome and plump- ness of temples, forehead, nape, eyes, cheeks, jaws, neck, shoulder, abdomen, axillae, chest and joints of upper and lower limbs being covered with flesh. 2. Has well grown body, bones and bony joints. 3. Concealed and well developed muscles observed all over body. Physio-psychological Characteristics 1. These individuals endowed with forgiveness, patience, non greediness, wealth, knowledge, happiness, simplic-. . ity, health, strength and longevity. Re ae Wed (Meda Sara Purusa) C.Vi. 8/106 Dasavidha Pariksa 455 gC GEST CATT] ASM | S.Su. 35/16 Physical Characteristics 1, Characterized by the abundance of unctuousness in com- plexion, voice, eyes, hair and head and other parts of body, nail, teeth, lips, urine and feces, 2. Big size body _ Physio-psychological Characteristics 1. These individuals possesses wealth, power, happiness, enjoyment, charity, simplicity & delicate habits. 2. His urine and sweet are unctuous. 3. Pleasant voice. 4, Unable to tolerate exertion aa Ut Yee (Asthi Séra Purusa) . afer: | at weteatet: frat: aerereet: : C.Vi. 8/107 TEs |! Fen: wars qeaeaerraahea: | S.Su. 35/16 Physical Characteristics 1. These people are characterized by robust heels, ankles, knees, fore-arms, collar bones, chin, head, joints, bones, nails and teeth. 2. Has big head. and shoulders. 3. Firm teeth, lower jaw, bones and nails. Physio-psychological Characteristics 1. These individuals are enthusiastic, and active are en- " dowed with strong and firm bodies along with longevity. AST AN Fee (Majja Sara Purusa) ee TERT Seer: fervrarken: wyedhignasag WTI: | a datget ace: sqqfeaiaraeraransia vara 1 C.Vi. 8/108
456 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Serpe ferment dares was TT | S.Su. 35/16 Physical Characteristics 1. These individuals characterized by softness of organs, Strength, unctuous, complexion and voice 2. Robust long and rounded joints. 3. Has wide eyes. Physio Psychological Characteristics 1. Pleasant and deep voice 2. Lustrous , 3. Endowed with longevity, strength, learning, wealth, knowledge, progeny and honour. Bee A Tee (Sukra Sara Purusa) aT 11 C.Vi. 8/109 | feretecrdaiteresatae ager WH S.Su. 35/16 If person fulfills maximum criteria from following points, then that person may be diagnosed as Sukrasara purusa. (A) Physical Characteristics Kstra Pitrna Loc ‘na (As milk is pouring dowi. from eyes with pleasant look) Dasavidha Pariksa 457 Snigdha, Vrtta, Sara, Sama, Samhata Sikara Dasana (Unctous, rounded, strong, uniform, firm with 4. ] Teeth | elevated margins and good look) 5. Nails | Snigdha, Samhata Sveta (Unctous, firm with white colour) Bone Snigdha, Sarhata, Sveta (Unctous, firm with white-colour) Mahaspik (large buttocks) | || Appea- | Bhrajisnu (Lustrous and dazzling rance appearance), Subhaga (Smart), Rupavan (Handsome) Varna Prasanna and Snigdha (Clear & unctuous) S. | Characteristics Yes No. 1 Praharsa bahula (marked penile erection/ great power of coitus) Bahula kama (excessive sexual desire) Styl priyopabhoga (Loved by women/ liking coitus with women) unctuous voice) [S| Suita ak amines) [5 Vina hak Seong heaty 9. [Attar Dhak Sipermaay on proper | 31 Vik. & Roga
458 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana 1. [Senna Dhak Gowen «did Fi. | Apatioa bhakae pra (Good prose | |_| fa. | Bake iulra Good voinne ofsemen || | (5. [Gara sutra hick some «iY «dd Vidhvana (Intelligent) _ Doesn’t suffer from Sukradusti Vikaras ; r {| | ed UX Fea (Satva Sara Purusa) waa aera: Bag: We: Bera weleret za eft: farattrs trae: | der waradita wor carwara: 11 C.Vi. 8/110 S.Su. 35/16 Physio-psychological Characteristics 1. Individuals endowed with good memory, devotion, in- telligence, cleanliness, valour, bravery, benevolent thoughts, actions, gratefulness, wisdom, purity, exces- sive enthusiasm, skill, courage, valour in fighting, ab- sence of sorrow, walks in proper gait, depth of wisdom and sincerity in actions and virtuous acts. 4. Gera Wtat (Samhanana Pariksa) (Examination of compactness of body organs) Rerasha Ger, ceft:, watsrairents ea: | war werafer wey, qagaha, qhfasaragiid, ated eniicfeqead | Ta Geet: Few arent, fronewsten:, wa TAT Hea Watt 1 C.Vi 8/116 Patient must be examined with ref¢érence to his samhanand or compactness of the body. Samhanana, samhati and samyojana—are synonymous.’A person having compact body and he reflects the quality of the overall body build. Clinically Dasavidha Pariksa 459 patient may be assessed as pravara (superior), madhyama (mod- erate) and avara (inferior) samhanana depending on the com- pactness of body organs. A. Pravara Samhanana 1. Symmetrical and well demarcated bones 2. Well knit joints 3. Well bound muscles and blood 4. Strong built 5. Excellent strength B. Madhyama Samhanana 1. Moderately symmetrical and moderately demarcated bones . Moderately knit joints - Moderately bound muscles and blood . Moderate built - Moderate strength ARWN C. Avara Samhanana . Weakly demarcated bones . Weakly knit joints . Weakly bound muscles and blood . Weak built . Weak strength 5, WATOT Uta (Pramana Pariksi) (Examination of measurements of bodily organs) “UR WN
460 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiaina & Roga Vijfiana warcergen, fies EERIE, serge GE, Hei- Length ght G Breadth | Circum | Others ference | (not sp- @ | o | (5) we To OTP WH w — w o as Pecthins [ae Some Pe 6. Phallus | - | 6 | ovine fey Pe waie Po |= | 9. Bastisiras 11. ParSva (side of chest) 12. Distance _ between the nipples N is 5 an 2 Dasavidha Pariksa 461 Organs Hei- | Length ‘Circum } Others ference } (not sp- Q) ©) Breadth ° Oo & m o Qa —_ (4) 13. Nipples 15. Hrdaya (heart) 16. Shoulders 17. Shoulder blades nN & on Ns 18. Prabahu (arms) 20. Hands 21. Axillae 122. Trika (sac- rum incl- uding coccyx) N foo] m=} ote — — 3 oe NIN.
eyes (exter- nal angles of the eyes) 462 Ayurvedtya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana [= 2 [romieea |= ‘ One should examine clinically the measurement of inidvidual organs of the body to understood the superiority, mediocrity and inferiority of one’s own anthropometry in re- sponse to his or her age and sex. A body possessed of organs having proper measurement is indowed with longevity, strength, ojas (energy), happiness, power, wealth and virtues. If the mea- surement is either on the high or low side, the individual pos- sesses qualities contrary to what are mentioned above. 4 When hands are fully out-spread| Pramana Pariksa According to Susruta TA GIG agrTAg AFAR: | TAIT. - Tease Aeaaa: MART | TA, UE: UES vaferah wagered | weferany weamsafcereefiftsat aaa GSAanTET: | Dasavidha Pariksa 463 UftoTel ART; ATTA Higit afe:, BUTT ATA TS RTC ARTHES CHV SIGE: BM Uae yee TATA. facto eitsitfir: ; 2; Wea ear ale; WSs | Tara ct atten Here farses 11S. su.35/72-15 Hei-- Length |Breadth | Circum | Others ght] ference . Great toe and second toe . 2. Third, fourth "th of. & little toe second 3. Anterior part’ of the foot 4. Arch of the foot 7. Middle portion
ssyurveanya vinru vijnana & Koga Vijiidna Organs Hei- | Length} Breadth | Circum [Others ecified) ia wae | =| 14. Chin 16. Anterior flaps of the’ nose 17. Root of the ear 18. Space be- tween brows & interior of eyes 20. Mouth cavity 23. Forehead 25. Intervals of pupils 27. Space 7 between penis & umbilicus 28. Space between! _ oo N me NpN Dasavidha Pariksa 465 Length | Breadth | Circum| Others ; (not sp- ecified) 12 Lic] | EE et Umbilicus & heart 29. Space between heart & neck 30. Between breasts w rary ie] p fe) o _ _ N uN ray ae on i) Niwo 32. Thickness of wrist 33. Foream 34. Centre of calf muscle and interval between shoulder & elbow 35. Interval between elbow & tip of the middle finger N aN wW ” > t | a w p 37. Interval be- tween wrist and elbow
Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Organs Hee Length] Breadth | Circum ference 39. Interval between thumb root & index ears & eye corner A 42. Index & ring finger 43. Little finger & thumb an a fs. Neck Nostril Ht of finger between margin of hairs & midd- Dasavidha Pariksa 467 Organs Hee Length | Breadth | Circum | Others ference skull to the end of hairs 51. tween two ears through back of the Total height of the person is one 2 & twenty — (120 fingers). The expert physician should take measurement of man & woman at the age of twenty five & sixteen years. respectively because they attain adult hood in their respective ages. : ae: PATENT aataerenttad: | ae: WMAP yar ar ale atsyar i dtdargrarcita fact aeqasta | qe meatrgia AT ETISATL I S.Su. 35/16-17 This is determined by measuring the height, length and breadth of the organs by taking the fingerbreadth of the indi- ‘vidual as the unit measurement. A body possessed of organs having proper measurement is endowed with longevity, strength, ojas (energy), happiness, power, wealth and nobility. If the measurement is either on the high or low side the "individual possesses qualities contrary to what are mentioned for proper measurement of body.
ane yurvealya Vikrtt Vijflana & Roga Vijfiana A) Pravara Pramana Height ) A person who fulfills standard measurement Length } criteria excellently Breadth , B) Madhyama Pramana Height ) A person who fulfiils standard measurement Length [sie moderately Breadth C) Avara Pramana Height | A person who fulfills standard measurement Length Breadth criteria up to lesser extent 6. Satmya (Suitability) (Examination of homologation) ATR Mees A Ter area | at a Weaken: wderaens 8 acre: aeereairwias Ward, Rea: Wtateacns FF weaTEITET Brea PTA aeriserrm=s vata, safiseeamd & a ness: mreatitrad watt ti C.Vi 8/118 It stands for such factors as are wholesome to the indi- vidual even when continuously used. Individuals for whom ghee, milk, oil and meat soup as well as the drugs and diets having all the six tastes are wholesome are endowed with strength, the power of facing difficult situations and longevity. Those who are accustomed to .ununctous things and drugs and diets, having only one particular taste, are mostly possessed of ‘less strength, less (resistance) to face difficult situations is of smaller life span and of meagre accessories like drugs for the treatment of his diseases. If there is combination of both these types of homologation, individuals are possessed with moder- _ ate strength. If aa individual accustomed to use only such drugs and ‘Dasavidha Pariksa 469 diets having one and the same taste the drugs and diets pos- sessed of the remaining tastes will be unwholesome for him. Yes | No ee rc ee cr Ta : 2. 3. 4 Mamsa rasa (Meat soup) 6 Ania Sou [7 | Lavana (Sour) Tikta (Bitter) a Kasaya (Astringent) Usna (Hot) Sita (Cold) Suska (Dry) Drava (Moisture) 7. —— a V1. 6 Ruksa (Rough) Others Out of 17 points, if person fulfills > 13 Criteria approximately = Pravara Satmya > 07 Criteria approximately = Madhyama Satmya > Q3 Criteria approximately = Avara Satmya 7. wea uttan (Satva Pariksa) (Examination of mental faculties) wraaaia wrayer aa: | eae cena | abit aaaea-wa, Weg, sat Ufa; aria warTaeMaearal: Feat
470 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana ward | Ta WATER: CRAG URGE, TACT ealtr F Fomrgmitnrg aedtatt dieracen great arenes; FERRARA ATU Mae GATS SHA Cais iG Gerad; Serra arent ay ot: creat oft sreerd succeafeg, aererihr aifa 8 waco dearer avert, afedtagiteacieeat Tatvaectuniapitaara w aygeratasnforans water Farrecrernelres te WATT TAT ACIS ALOT 1 | C.Vi 8/119 ; Satva is mind and it regulates, the body because of its as- sociation with soul. It is of three types, viz., pravara (supe- rior), madhyama (moderate) and avara satva (inferior) depend- ing on their mental faculties. Wat Ga (Pravara Satva) Individuals having mental faculties of superior type are possessed of the excellence of these faculties. 1. Excellent mental faculties (dhi, dhrti and smrti) 2. Able to bear the stronger therapies without producing any harmful effect to the body. 3. Weak physique persons having excellent mental faculties tolerate serious exogenous and endogenous diseases with- out many difficulties 4. Tolerates and adjusts to pain or odd situations well. 5. Persons adopts same sort of feeling/mental status towards happiness and sorrow. 6. Remaining under control by himself. 7. Predominant of satvaguna. Rea AeA (Madhyama Satva) 1. Moderate mental faculties (dhi, dhrti and smrti) 2. Able to bear the stronger therapies with producing harm- ful effect to the body. 3. Predominant rajo guna tolerates when controlled by others. Dasavidha Pariksa A7\ 4. Weak physique person having moderate mental faculties tolerates serious exogenous and endogenous diseases with much difficulty. . 5. Tolerates and adjusts to pain or odd situations moderately. Wat Act (Avara Satva) 1. Inferior type of mental faculties. 2. Neither by themselves nor through others can sustain their mental strength. 3. Inspite of having sound physique, they cannot susceptible to fear, grief, greed, delusion and ego. 4. When they hear even stories describing wrathful. fearful, hateful, terrifying and ugly situation or come across vi- sions of flesh or blood of'an animal or man, they fall vic- tims to depression, pallor, fainting, madness, giddiness of falling on the ground, or such events may even lead them to death. 5. These types of persons are contraindicated to samsodhana karma. 6. Tolerates and adjusts to pain or odd situations very badly. 7. Predominant tamoguna individuals cannot tolerate at all. 8. sie vifte atten (Ahara Sakti Pariksa) (Examination of power of assimilation) SHEN MRHADT MTA AAT TTT GLUTGRAAT TTT; ae METAS 1 C.Vi 8/120 One’s capacity for food can be examined from two angles viz. abhyavaharana Sakti (the power of ingestion) and jarana gakti (the power of digestion). Strength and life span of the individual are determined by the one’s own diet capacity. It all depends on the condition of the agni residing in the body. That’s why dcaryds defined the role of agni in the manifestation or aggravation of the disease. If individual posses a good diges- tive power then he will be able to sustain the stronger therapies ;
472 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana as a consequence he will recover quickly from the afflictions. Protection of agni by any means is necessary to maintain ex- cellent digestion and power of ingestion, this leads to stronger immunity to resist against dreadful diseases. This may be clas- sified into three subtypes for the purpose of clinical assessment. Wat ser VRE (Pravara Ahara Sakti)-Excellent Power of Digestion Persons having excellent power of ingestion and digestion of food are claimed to be healthy persons. These kinds of per- sons are endowed with excellent strength, longevity, joy, good physique, superior mental faculties, full of essence of dhatus, power of resisting any sort of difficulties etc. Digestion of food when taken in large quantity is indicative of excellent ahara Sakti. . eM set IR (Madhyama Ahira Sakti)-Moderate diges- tive power : Individuals having moderate strength of ingestion and di- gestion of food are claimed to be moderately healthy. Unable to digest properly when person consumes large amount of food. Moderate medicaments may be prescribed for the effective management. These persons possess moderate Strength longev- ity and immunity. HAT SEI Vk (Avara Ahdra Sakti)-Weak digestive power Person is unable to digest even small quantities of food. These persons suffers from diseases very oftenly and endowed with less strength, longevity, immunity and unable to sustain the stronger medicaments. Mild medicaments are required for the effective management and medicines should be adminis- tered for longer duration to recover from diseases. 9. cara vith Uta (Vyayama Sakti Pariksa) (Examination for power of exercise) Sarasa SaaS agree ave | arteren eptat atreny 11 C.Vi 8/121 Dasavidha Pariksa 473 The patient should be examined with reference to his ca- pacity for exercise; which determines one’s own ability to per- form work. Strength of individuals is classified into three cat- egories depending upon their ability to perform work namely- Pravara vyayama Sakti -Excellent power of exercise Madhyama vyayama Sakti -Moderate power of exercise Avara vyayama Sakti -Mild power of exercise vat sara sifti (Pravara Vyayama Sakti)- Individual! possess excellent exercise endurance. To ad- vice rehabilitation programme, person should have a good power of exercise. These persons are able to do a physiotherapy technique without much difficulty, this helps for faster recov- ery. These kinds of individuals are able to perform heavy exer- cises. Madhyama Vyayama Sakti- These individuals possess a moderate power of exercise. Persons follow the physiotherapeutic technique moderately as a result it hampers the quicker relief. Moderate medicaments must be prescribed to gain desirable results. Avara Vyaéyama Sakti- Individuals possess a mild power of exercise. These people are unable to follow the physiotherapeutic technique even upto slighter extent. This hastens the slower recovery. Mild medica- ments are suitable to gain good results. 10. aa atten (Vaya Pariksa) (Examination in respect of Age) 32 Vik. & Roga
474 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana at Haanenkatraaerdithitean ease VU aera PrIAMAMNAyet agqangura wav sickqead araderny | ater erage: wromfery ae; aha a airaradgrasitferis fa TRB: ; aa faphrard: wHenfeaefapige Maras wATOT ERT qatar faery 11 C.Vi. 8/122 Vaya (age) is defined as the state of body corresponding to the length of time that has passed since birth. Age is broadly divided into three stages—bdala (childhood), madhya (middle age) and jirna (old age). Childhood is determined upto sixteen years, when the dhdtus are immature, sexual characters are not manifested, the body is delicate, unenduring, with incomplete strength and predominant in kapha. In this stage dhatus are in developing stage and unstable mind remains upto thirty years. Mild medicaments may be employed. This middle age is char- acterized by strength, energy, virility, prowess, acquisition, re- tention, recollection, speech, understanding and qualities of all dhatus having reached the normal limit; with proper physical and mental strength, without degeneration in qualities of dhatus, with predominance of pitta dhatu and is upto 60 years. Stron- ger medicaments may be employed to gain the success. Old age is upto one hundred years. There is diminution of dhdtus (tissue elements), strength of sense organs, energy, man- liness, valor, power of understanding, retention, memorizing, speech and analyzing fact. There is gradual diminution in, the qualities of dhatus and dominance of vata. There are persons who live longer or shorter than that, in such cases, one should determine the three divisions of age on the basis of strength of the factors like prakrti, sara etc. except vikrti and also charac- ters of different periods of life span. This period should be handled carefully with mild and moderate medicaments because of delicate nature of the old age. Life span of individuals viz. long, medium and short can be determined by superiority, mediocrity and inferiority of prakrti, sdra etc. except vikrti. For example if a person possess a pravara qualities of prakrti, sdra etc. except vikrti then indi- Dasavidha Pariksa 475. vidual lives longer, madhyama qualities leads to medium life span and avara qualities leads to ‘short life span. So, depending upon the long, medium and short life span, age may be divided into bala, madhya, jirna, for example short life span may be determined upto 70 years in which young age may be deter- mined upto 16 years, middle age from 16 to 50 years and old age thereafter. Factors Modifying Drug Action Variation in response to the same dose of a drug between different patients and even in the same patient on different oc- casions is a rule.rather than exception. A multitude of host and environmental factors influence drug response. Though, indi- vidual variation cannot be totally accounted for by these fac- tors, their understanding can guide choice of appropriate drug and dose for an individual patient. This concept was clearly defined while describing dasavidha pariksa to understand and to implement a suitable therapeutics in a suitable dose. Various qualitative and quantitative factors modify drug actions. A. Quantitatively-The plasma concentration and/or the ac- tion of the drug is increased or decreased. This view was clearly defined when describing the state of Ghdra Sakti, pramana and samhanana. B. Qualitatively-The type of response is altered e.g. drug allergy on idiosyncrasy. The various factors are dis- cussed below~— 1. Body size : It influences the concentration of the drug attained at the site of action. For exceptionally obese or lean individuals and for children dose may be calculated on body weight (BW) basis; BW (Kg) Individua}] dose = x average ddult dose Ayurvedic Gcaryas defined the sarhhanana and pramana to implement strong, moderate and mild dose of the medicine
476 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana depending on their pravara, madhyama and avara characteris- tics properties respectively. 2. Age: The dose of a drug for children often calculated from the adult dose. Age Age+12 Solid dosage forms and aerosol inhalations are difficult to administer to young children. Children are growing and are susceptible to special adverse effects. This view was described clearly that’s why mild-therapeutics was described in Ayurveda for the management of child health problems. That’s why mer- curial preparations, purificatory procedures etc. are strictly contraindicated in children to prevent adverse effects. Child dose = xadult dose (Young's formula) Elderly—in the elderly, renal function progressively declines (intact nephron loss) and drug dose have to be reduced. This principle is clearly described in Ayurveda i.e. elderly patients must be handled delicately and mild therapeutics should be em- ployed to lessen the adverse effects and to gain good results. Keeping this in mind purificatory measures are contraindicated in elderly patients to avoid the incidence of adverse drug reac- tions and mild to moderate medicaments advised. 3. Sex : Females have smaller body size and require doses that are on the lower side of the range. Subjective effects of drugs may differ in females because of their mental make up. In women consideration must also be given to menstruation, pregnancy and lactation. There are marked physiological changes during pregnancy, especially in third trimester, which can. alter drug disposition. This concept was accepted in Ayurvedic literature i.e. fe- ' male are having moderate compactness, measurements, essence of dhdtus, power of digestion and exercise etc. That’s why moderate therapeutic must be employed to lessen the incidence of adverse drug reactions. During pregnancy mild therapeutic approach was described and stronger therapies like alkali, cau- terization, -' ‘ficatory procedures are contraindicated. Dasavidha Pariksa 477 4. Species and race: There are many examples of differ- ences in responsiveness to drugs among different species. Different species having prakrti of different type, this leads to the responsiveness of the medicine. 5. Genetics: The dose of the drug to produce the same effect may vary 4-6 folds among different individuals. This is mainly because of differing rates of drug metabolism as the amount of microzomal enzymes in genetically controlled. There are also differences in target organ sensitivity. This concept was defined under prakrti and sara pariksa. This is varies in different constitution and essence of dhatus because drug metabolism varies among different subclassi- fication of prakyti and sara. 6. Environmental factors and time of administration : Sev- eral environmental factors affect drug responses; exposure to insecticides, carcinogens, tobacco, smoke, and consumption of charcoal boiled meat are well known to induce drug metabo- lism. Type of diet and meals can alter drug absorption. Subjec- tive effect of a drug may be markedly affected by the setup in which it is taken. This view was clearly defined under kala and deSa pariksa. pathya regimen, time period for the ingestion of medicine was described in detail in Ayurvedic texts, that’s why different time period for the consumption of medicine described to enhance the efficacy of the prescribed compound. 7. Psychological Factor : Efficacy of a drug can be affected by patient’s beliefs, attitudes and expectations. This view was clearly stated by our Gcaryas under satva partksa and satva sara pariksa in detail. 8. Pathological states : Not only drugs modify disease pro- cesses, several diseases can influence drug disposition and drug action. This concept was clearly defining under vikrti pariksa 9. Tolerance : It means requirement of higher dose of a
478 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana drug to produce a given response. It is a widely occuring adap- tive biological phenomenon. It may be natural] or acquired. This concept was described under satmya partksa. Ud seed faahacaht sari vata setae faver fafarsaeas y deat Seerepiet 1 adt Aare deraneciauns deed faust gerd dermeeanwaere 11 C.Vi. 8/123 Strengh of the individuals can be classified into superior- ity, mediocrity and inferiority based on prakrtyadi nine factors except vikrti. Three types of the strength of the dosas are in- ferred from the three types of the severity of morbidity. Based on this three types of medicaments may be planned i.e. strong, mild and moderate therapy should be administered. Chapter 20 Bade sree atta (SuSrutokta Dvadasa Pariksa) aga franssqueda wife; orargft arreqraia- at tere areata Vast Serr] AT | S. Su 35/3 Before prescribing any therapeutic procedures, physician should examine his Ayus (life span); if he has long span then his vyadhi (disease), rtu (season), agni (digestive power), vayah (age), deha (body build), bala (strength), satva (mind), satmya (conducive factors), prakrti (constitution), bhesaja (drug): and deéa (habitat). : J. arg Witen (Examination of Life Span) dtatg (Dirghayu) fadeiorary- Pe LS. Su 35/4 e@ One who possesses big hands, feet, flanks, back, tip of the breasts, teeth, face, shoulders and forehead. @ One who possesses long finger joints, expirations, eyes, arms. a @ One who have broad brows and space in between the breasts and chest are broad. e One who possesses short calves, penis and neck. * Whose mind, voice and umbilicus are deep. «- Whose breasts are not greatly elevated but are firm.
480 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiana & Roga Vijfiana ¢ Whose ears and back of the head are well grown big and hairy. e Whose body drying first from the head after bath and anointing and the region of the heart later on. One who possesses all the above qualities should be un- derstood as dirghayu (having long span of life) should be treated with all efforts, on’ the contrary one who possesses opposite to the above qualities should be understood as alpayu (short span of life). One who possesses mixed features are considered as madhyamayu. _ WEAATY (Madhyamayu-—Moderate Life Span) Terragt owat se fate Fi seeeeikiee = hal: | yeaa: & ot fretsfiren ost oe uit a aia | ararryedt a a waged crea Wes: 1) Te wera ocomedafe maf: 11 S. Su. 35/7-8 e One who possesses well manifest, broad, two, three or more lines below the aksa (clavicles). e Whose feet and ears are more mascular. e Whose tip of the nose is elevated. e Appearance of vertical lines on the. back. © Person will survive for 70 years. ANY (Alpayu—Short Life Span) wearer ward wed fete Fy gear ar vaffit qnecni aera wires za a ANTS HATT | Re a seuit cna deer wrdftm: 11 weit wert asf amid eats teat as faust a witaeassfereriry 11 S. Su. 359-11 SuSrutotka DwadaSa Pariksa 481 e One who possesses. short joints, big penis, chest having hairs appearing in circles (whirls). Whose back is. not broad . ars and nose located slightly up than their normal position. Whose gums are visible during laughing or talking. Whose sight is unsteady will survive only for 25 years only. Sartra pramana (measurements of the body) and sara (ex- cellence of mind and tissues) are described in detail under da§avidha pariksa chapter. 2. waft atten (Vyadhi Pariksa- Examination of diseases) S.Su. 35/20-23 It has been discused in detail under Vyadhi and Upadrava Chapter. 3. eq Whel (Ru Pariksa- examination of seasons) sta) 0 pilandtarcgqen = arenfrarcory | weet pay frat wat ferararet 3 era! stand at ferarara weet a a sat frat | fire deusfafeet at areateatts 3 feria 1 at gdtef weaie at anit auf a wm finn, Tq aw en gerard §.Su. 35/25-27 Detail description of seasons narrated under rtu carya adhyaya i.e. S.Su. 6" chapter. Hot therapies are required to com- bat the effect of cold season and vice versa. Medicaments should be prescribed in a right time. Treatment done earlier to the proper time or treatment not done at the proper time and treatment being either inadequate or in excess, these do not succeed even in curable diseases. Therapy is called ideal which cures the aggravated dis- ease and doesn’t manifest another disease. Therapy is called
482 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijiiana unideal which cures the disease but gives rise to another dis- ease. 4. af Wien (Agni Pariksa- Examination of digestive fire) S. Su 35/28-33 It has been discused in detail under Agni Chapter. 5. Fa ata ( Vaya Pariksa—Examination of Age) oerg faiad- aed, wed, qafifa | aiasteyrenifar aren: | a fatten: - after, afttarel, starer sft | aq dacacau: afizar:, fadacat-at: efrarer:, uedisorer sft | Weyracitea? wed S. Su 35/35-37 According to Sufruta va i ifi in D1 ya is Classified into 3 st namely balya, madhya and vrddha. nage I. Balya (Childhood or early young age)—Upto 16 years It can be subdivided into 3 i) Kstrapa—-Only milk consumption—upto one year. ii) Kstrann@da—Milk and solid food—upto two years. ili) Anndda—Only solid food—more than 2 years upto 16 years. II. Madhya (Middle age or young age) More than 16 years upto 70 years of age sub dividided into i) Vrddhi- Upto 20 years (Growth phase) ii) Yauvana— Upto 30 years (Youth and adolescence) > SuSsrutotka Dwadaéga Pariksa 483 iii) Sampurnata— Upto 40 years (Mature stage) iv) Parihani~More than 40 upto 70 years (Degenerative phase) With full growth of tissues, sense faculties, strength and vitality. Ill. Vrddha (Old age) After 70 years degeneration of tissues started along with diminution in the tissues, sense faculties, strength, vitality, en- thusiasm day after day, development of wrinkles on skin, grey hairs, baldness, suffers from cough, dyspnoea etc. and inabil- ity to perform all activities. art faaeit yee meat feta gt S. Su. 35/31-32 Slesma enhances greatly in young age, pitta increases greatly in middle age and vata increases greatly in old age. This should be kept in mind before planning any therapy. Use of ksara (alkali preparations) and purgation therapies should be avoided during young age and old age in diseases curable by these treatments. If it is necessary then it should be done mildly and slowly. 6. % when (Deha Pariksa—Examination of Body Physique) Re: TAS: HM, AeA, FA... |S. Su. 35/40 eefag geteaia war wycrastt wh taut da wert dia wad free i S. Su. 35/4] Body is of three kinds i.e. sthula (obese), krSa (emaci- ated) and madhya (moderate). Obese persons should be man- aged by thinning therapies and emaciated persons should be
484 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiidna managed by stoutening therapies. Moderate built individuals should protect their body as such. 7. oat Uttat (Bala Pariksa) S. Su. 35/42-43 Assessment of strength may be done by observing the na- ture of dosds, age group etc. because therapy differs from per- son to person depending upon strength of dosa, age etc. Only the powerful person can sustain all kinds of treatment proce- dures. That’s why among all factors strength of individual ac- counts very much before planning treatment. By look some people may be emaciated but are very strong, while some people look stout but possess little strength. That’s why proper understanding of stamina and strength should be inferred through physical exercises. 8. Tet attan (Satva Pariksa- examination of mental power) S.Su. 35/44-45 1. Satva is the capacity of the mind which does not cause frustration (agony, misery) at times of sorrow. . Satvavana person reacts composedly towards joy. - The person who has satva 84na predominantly tolerates every thing i:e grief, happiness etc. 4. He who has rajo guna predominantly tolerates when con- trolled by others. - He who has tamoguna predominantly cannot tolerate at all. SuSrutotka Dwadaga Pariksa 485 9, Tera Ute (Satmya Partksa—Examination of Habituate) ae ¢ GaN eaTaMManearact va Tey wate frearat aerareeafit vata | a TH: wed aa qeaa frifac 1 arRrmaat aq areata fase 11 S. Su. 35/46-47 Satmya means things which does not causes harm to the body even though they are opposite from ones own constitu- tion, habitat, time, caste, season, disease, exercise, water, day sleep, tastes and such others. The usage of such tastes which when consumed makes for happiness only, apart from that produced by exercise and such others should be considered as sdtmya. 10. wapfet uaten (Prakrti Pariksa- Examination of constitutions) it has been discused in detail under Dasavidha Partksa Chapter. 11. Fast ota (Bhesaja Pariksa-Examination of bhesaja) * Detail description about bhesaja paritksa outlined in 46" chapter of Susruta Sutrasthana. 12. fet UtteMnt (Desa Pariksé—-Examination of Land Regions) araftert nyse aire: ; SaSVTTAOT: HTENTUT Bf | S. Su. 35/42 DeSa is classified as Gnupa, jangala and sadharana deésa. arya 89t (Aniipa Dega—Marshy Land) Land which is full of water, possessing ups and downs on
486 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijiana the ground, more rivers flowing in the area, excess rainfall, soft, cold wind, full of high mountains and trees. Persons possesses soft and tender body, well built and suf- fers from kapha and vata vikara. WIFH BVT (Jangala Desa-Desert Land) The land which is dry similar to the sky. Possesses few, small trees on the land, thorny with minimum rainfall, having less streams and reservoirs of water, wind is hot and strong, with few-small hills apart from one another. Persons body is stable and emaciated and suffers from vata and pittaja vikara. WAN IH (Sadharana Desa-Moderate Land) Mixed features of the above two lands is called sadharana desa. . wr er) aenredivanferned: | aero waa aiteTeneTet wa S. Su. 35/45 This land enjoys cold, rain, heat and wind in a moderate manner, this makes the vata, pitta and kapha dosas in their normalcy it is called sadharana deéga. 7 AM geet: pest at wrenem: | west far der ara saan: 11 sft ane a | are | we BERaTAS sat were yf S. Su. 35/44-45 Diseases of anupa dea are not strong if brought to jangala deSa and vice versa. In the same way dosas aggravated in their normal seats are not powerful but become stronger if aggra- vated in another sites. One should not worry about fear of dis- SuSsrutotka Dwadaga Pariksa 487 eases due to land causes provided if he follows whole somefood, sleep, activities etc. which are similar in qualities with the quali- ties of that land region. fear done fearrat. wate) qdeat wiedérat a fearigad fea: 1 ; S.Su, 35/55 If treatment fails to give desired results then another treat- ment should be administered but only after the bouts (effects) of the earlier treatment has subsided; combining two or more reatments at a sametime is not beneficial. orenasts wale ale da fear fem 1 w@iea da anf: qepeeat afe 11 . S.Su, 35/56 In case of chronic disorders or difficult disorders treat- ment may be continued for longer duration provided if it is comfortable to; the patient. a wad fafaaewd fauif arenas ctr a ane wdeheaft Searqawgast 11 S.Su. 35/57 The skilled physican who prescribed therapies by consid- ening above points, will be able to save the diseased individual by the help of time etc. by cutting the noose of the death with the axe of medicines. o
Appendix I Normal Values Narmal Values I. Laboratory Value of Clinical Significance Il. Weights and Measurements of Normal Organs The prefixes and conversion factors for metric units of length, weight and volume given according to SI system are as follows: Table P-1 : Prefixes and Conversion Factors in S] System Prefix | Prefix Units of Units of | Units of symbol length weight | volume Kilometre Kilogram | Kilolitre (km) (kg) liter (1) os | Jo" decimetre decigram | decilitre (dm) (dg) (dl) c 10? centimetre centigram | centilitre (cm) (cg) (cl) at | millimetre milligram | millilitre (mm) (mg) (ml) pb 10* micrometre {| microgram | microlitre (Tie) we qd 10° -nanometre nanogram | nanolitre (nm) (pg) (pb 10” picometre picogram | picolitre (pm) (pg) (pl) f 19075 femtometre | femtogram | femtolitre (im) (fg) (f) altometre altogram | altolitre (am) (ag) (al) a f 2 3 1 Appendix 489 The WHO as well as International committee for standardisation in hematology (ICSH) have recommended adop- tion of SI System by the scientific community throught the world. In this section, laboratory values are given in both con- ventional and international units. Conversion from one system to the other can be done are as follows : mmol / L x atomic weight mg/dl = 10 mg/dl x10 atomic weight mmol/L = Recently, the word normal values and normal ranges is replaced by reference values and reference limits and it is very important valuable guideline for the clinician. The laboratory values given are divided into three sec- tions namely clinical chemistry (Table-P-2), other body fluids (Table P-3) and hematologic values (Table P-4), In general, an alphabetic order has been followed. Table P-2 : Clinical Chemistry of Blood. [components __|riwia__| Alcohol, ethyl |. {Serum/ mild to moderate whole blood | Negative intoxication marked intoxication severe intoxication Reference value Conventional SI units Aminotransferases (transaminases) aspartate (AST, SGOT alanine (ALT, SGPT) Serum 0-35 U/L Serum 0-35 U/L Plasma Serum 10-80 p g/dl 60-180 U/L a3 Vik. & Roga
490. Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana Table P-2 : Clinical Chemistry of Blood. Reference value Components Conventional — SI units Bicarbonate Whole 21-30 mEq/L 21-28 (HCO,) blood mmol/L Bilirubin Total 0.3-1.0 mg/dl Direct 0.1-0.3 mg/dl (conjugated) Indirect 0.2-0.7 mg/d] (unconjugated) Calcium, ionised Whole 4.5-5.6 mg/dl 1.1-1.4 blood mmol/L Calcium, Total Plasma {| 9.0-10.5 mg/dl} 2.2-2.6 mmol/L CO, content Plasma j 21-30 mEq/L 21-30 mmol/L (arterial) (arterial) Chloride (CI) Serum 98-106 mEq/L | 98-106 mmol/L Cholesterol total desirable for adults <200 mg/dl borderline high 200-239 mg/dl <5.2 mmoV/L high undesirable >240 mg/d! ; LDL-cholesterol, mo desirable range . <130 mg/dl <3.36 mmol/L HDL-cholesterol, Protective range <60 mg/dl <1.15 mmol/L Copper Serum 70-1401 g/dl 13-241 mol/L Creatine kinase (CK) |Serum males : 60-400 U/L 1.00-6.67 pt kal/L female 40-150 U/L 0-67-2.50 : Lt ka/L | Electrophoresis, Serum | See under proteins protein Appendix 491 ; Reference value : Components Conventional SI units Creatine kinase- Serum | 0-7 ng/ml O7p gL - MB (CK-MB) Creatinine Serum | 0.5-1.5 mg/dl 53-133 pt mol/L, Fatty acids, free Plasma | <180 mg/dl <18 mg/L non-esterified Gamma-glutamyl 1-94 U/L 1-94 U/L transpeptidase (transferase) Whole | 21-30 mEq/L blood ty -Gt) Gases, arterial Whole blood HCO, Whole blood Whole blood Plasma 21-28 mmol/L 7.38-7.44 7.38-7.44 35-45 mmHg,- 4.7-5.9 kPa 80-100 mmHg 11.0-13.0 kPa Glucose (fasting) normal impaired fasting glucose (IFG) diabetes mellitus Glucose (2 hr post prandial) normal Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) diabetes mellitus Immunoglobulins 70-110 mg/dl 110-126 mg/dl <6.1 mmol/L 6.1-7.0 mmol/L >126 mg/dl >7.0 mmol/L <140 mg/dl <7.8 mmol/L. 140-200 mg/dl >200 mg/dl 7,8-11.1 mmoVL >11.! mmol/L 60-309 mg/dl 0-14 mg/dl <0.0.25 mg/dl
492 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana Reference value Components Conventional. SI units IsG 800-1500 mg/dl IgM 53-334 mg/d] Lactate dehydro- 100-190 U/L genase (LDH) ; -| Lactate/pyruvate ratio Lipids Appendix 493 Reference value Components Conventional SI units Renal blood flow 1200 ml/min Sodium 136-145 mEq/L 1.7-3.2 pt kat/L 136-145 mmol/L 11-22 2 mol/L 7 10/1 Triglycerides <160 mg/dl Thyroid function tests radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) 24-hr See under cholesterol <35 mg/dl Non-protein nitrogen (NPN) 5-30% Oxygen thyroxine (T4) 5-12p eh 64-154 nmol/L (% saturation) triiodothyronine 70-190 ng/dI 1.1-2.9 nmol/L arterial blood 94-100% (T3) thyroid stimulating 0.4-5.0 mU/L hormone (TSH) Troponins, cardiac (cTn) 0.4-5.0 1. U/ml venous blood 60-85% pH Blod 7.38-7.44 _| Phosphatases troponin J (cTnl) 0-0.4 ng/ml 0-0.4 1 g/L acid phosphatase 0-5.5 U/L 0.90 nkat/L troponin T 0-0.1 ng/ml 0-0.1 np g/L alkaline 30-120 U/L 0-5-20 nkat/L (cTnT) Phosphatease . Urea 20-40 mg/dl 3.3-6.6 nmol/L Phosphorus, 3-4.5 mg/dl 1.0-1.4 Urea nitrogen 10-20 mg/dl inorganic mmol/L (BUN) Potassium 3.5-5.0 mEq/L | 3.5-5.0 Uric acid mmol/L males 2.5-3.0, mg/dl 150-480 p mol/L Proteins total albumin females 1.5-6.0 mg/dl 90-360 pp, mol/L *u kat (kat stands for katal, meaning catalytic activity) is a modern unit of enzymatic activity. Table P-3 : Other Body Fluids Reference value Components Conventional SI units 5.5-8 g/dl 3.5-5.5. g/dl (50-60%) 2.0-3.5 g/dl (40-50%) globulin @ 1 globulin 0.2-0.4 g/d) a 2 globulin 0.5-0.9 g/dl Catecholamines 24-hr 8 -globulin 0.6-1.1 g/dl urinary : y globulin 0.7-1.7 g/dl ti A/G ratio oxen 1.5-3:1 epinephrine <10 ng/day
494 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijflana & Roga Vijfiana Reference value Components Conventional SI units — free catecho- -<100p1 g/day lamines metanephrine <1.3: mg/day vanilly]l mandelic <8 mg/day acid (VMA) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) CSF volume 120-150 ml CSF pressure 60-150 mm water leucocytes 0-5 lymphoctyes/p: 1 7.31-7.34 40-70 mg/dl 20-50 mg/dl <3 mg/day 24-hr urine Gastric analysis Gastric 24-hr volume juice pH basal acid output (BAO) maximal acid output (MAO) after injection of stimulant BAO/MAO ratio Glomerular 1-SmEq/hr 1-5 mmol/br 5-40 mEq/hr 5-40 mmol/hr <0.6 ) 180 L/day (about Urine filtration rate. 125 ml/min) (GFR) a) 5-HIAA 24-hr 2-8 mg/day , urinary | excretion 17-Ketosteroids 24-hr ¢ urinary excretion males females Seminal fluid 7-25 mg/day 4-15 mg/day Semen liquefaction sperm morp- hology sperm motility pH sperm count volume Schilling’s test (intrinsic factor test) Urine examination Specific excretion 24-hr urine protein, qualita- tive porphobilinogen porphobilinogen urobilinogen Urobilinogen D-Xylose excretion Appendix components | iia | Within 20 min 24-hr urinary excretion — 24-hr volume <150 mg/day urine (random) urine (random) urine (random) 24-hr urine Urine (random) Stool 495 Keference value Conventional 370% hormal mature spermatozoa >60% >7.0 (average 7.7) 60-150 million/ml 1.5-5.0 ml >10% of ingested dose of ‘hot’ vitamin B.,, 600-1800 ml (variable) Negative Negative Negative 1.0-3.5 mg/day Present in 1:20” dilution 5-8g within 5 hr after oral dose of 25 g SI units 60-150x10%/ml
496 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfana Table P-4 : Normal Haematologic Values. Reference value Fat/cell ratio : 50:50 Myeloid/ : erythroid (M/E) ratio : 2-4:1 (mean 3:1) Myeloid series : 30-45% (37.5%) Myeloblasts : 0.1-3.5% Promyelocytes : 0.5-5% Erythroid series : 10-15% (mean 12.5%) Megakaryocytes : 0.5% Lymphocytes : 5-20% Plasma cells : < % Reticulum cells : 0.1-2% Erythrocytes and Haemoglobin Erythrocyte count } Blood males 4.5-6.5x10/L, (mean 5.5x10!/L) females . 3.8-5.8x10!2/L, (mean 4.8x10"/L) Erythrocyte 6.7-7.7 p m diameter (mean 7.2 1 m) Erythrocyte ‘ Myelogram thickness peripheral central Erythrocyte indices (Absolute values) Mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCB) Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC) Erythrocyte life-span Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) Westergren Ist hr, males females Wintrobe, Ist hr, daily requirement red cell level Serum level Appendix 497 Reference value SI units 30-35 g/dl 120 days 0-15 mm 0-20 mm 0-9 mm 0-20 mm 15-200 ng/ml 12-150 ng/ml 15-200. g/L 15-150 p. g/L 2-3 mg 100-200 1 g Red cells | 150-450 ng/ml Serum 6-12 ng/ml 11-57 nmol/L
498 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Appendix 499 . Reference value Reference value Components Fluid Conventional _ SI units Components Conventional SI units Free erythrocyte Red cells males | 50 mg/kg body protoporphyrin weight (FEP) 35 mg/kg body Haematocrit weight 30% of body iron Tron, storage form (ferritin and haemosiderin) Osmotic fragility slight haemolysis 40-54% 37-47% Haptoglobin (Hb) 60-270 mg/dl 0.6-2.7 g/L Adult haemoglobin Blood at 0.45 to 0.39 g/d} NaCl 13.0-18.0 g/dl 130-180 g/L complete at 0.33 to 0.36 11.5-16.5 g/dl 115-165 g/L haemolysis g/dl NaCl © Plasma Hb 0.5-5 mg/dl 5-50 mg/L Mean corpuscular 0.4-0.45 g/dl (quantitative) haemoglobin A, (HbA,) 1.5-3.5% haemoglobin, foetal (HbP) in adults <1% NaCl 0.5-2.5% 2-6% 1.5-2.0 mg/dl Transferrin Vitamin B,, 1 HDF, children <5% body stores 10-12 mg under 6 months daily requirement 24p g Iron, total 80-1801 g/dl 10.7-26.9 serum level 200-900 molL, Total iron binding 250-460 p g/dl 44.8-71.6 capacity (TIBC) pmol Tron saturation 20-45% (mean 33%) Iron intake 10-15 mg/day pg/ml Leucocytes Total leucocyte count (TLC) adults infants (full term, at birth) infants (1 year) Differential Leucocyte count (DLC) 4,000-11000/. | 10,000-25,000/. 1 0.5-1.0 mg/day 1-2 mg/day 6,000-16,000/1 1 Tron, total body content Blood film
500 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfidna & Roga Vijfiana Components Fluid Conventional SI units P (polymorphs or 40-75% (2,000- neutrophils) 7500/1 1) L (ymphocytes) 20-50% (1,500- . 4000/1. D M (monocytes) 2-10% (200- 8001 1) E (eosinophils) B (basophils) Muramidase 1-6% (40-400/1 1) <1% (10-100/p 1) 5-20 g/ml Platelets and Coagulation Bleeding time (BT) Ivy’s method template method Clot retraction time qualitative 2-7 min 2.5-9.5 min Finger pr- ick blood Clotted blood Visible in 60 min (complete in <24-hr) . 48-64% (55%) quantitative Clotting time (CT) Lee and White method Partial thromboplastin time with kaolin (PTTK) or activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) Prothrombin time (PT) (Quick’s one-stage method) 4-9 min at 37°C 30-40 sec 10-14 sec Plasma Plasma Appendix 501 Reference value Components Conventional SI units Thrombin time Plasma <20 sec (controt 12 sec 150,000- 400,000/p1 | (TT) Platelet count Weights and Measurements of Normal Organs It is very much necessary to known the normal values of weight and measurements of an organs to understand the sig- nificance of their alterations. Generally accepted comprehen- sive list of normal weight and measurement of normal organs in fully developed healthy individuals and normal healthy new born are compiled in Table P4. Single value and value within brackets are indicate of the average figure for that organs. Measurements have been given as width x breadth (thickness) x length. Table P-5 : Weights and Measurements of Normal Organs. At birth (wherever applicable Adrenal gland : Weight 4-5 gm 8-11 gm . Brain : Weight (in males) 320-420 gm Weight (in females) Measurements (sagittal x vertical) Volume of cerebro- spinal fluid Blood 1400 gm 1250 gm 16.5x12.S cm 120-150 ml Heart : Weight (in males) Weight (in females) 300-350 gm 250-300 gm
502 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana Organs In adults At birth (wherever applicable Thickness of right 0.3-0.5 1.3-1.5 cm 10 cm 7.5 cm 8.5.cm 12cm 10-30 ml ; ventricular wall Thickness of left 20-30 gm 100-160 gm ventricular wall Circumference of mitral valve Circumference of aortic valve Circumference of pulmonary valve Circumference of tricuspid valve Volume of pericardial fluid Intestines : Length of duodenum 30 cm Total length of 550-650 cm small intestine Length of large intestine - 150-170 cm Kidneys : Weight each (in males) Weight each (in females) Measurements 150 gm 135 gm 3.5x5.5x 11.5 cm Liver : Weight (in males) 1400-1600 (1500) gm Weight (in females) 1200-1400 (1300) gm Measurements 27x8x20 cm Appendix 375-500 (450) gm 325-450 (400) gm <15 ml Weight (right lung) Weight (left lung) Volume of pleural - (cricoid cartilage to cardia) Distance from incisors to gastro-oesophageal junction Ovaries : Weight (each) Measurements 4-8 (6) gm 1x2.5x4.5 cm Pancreas : 60-100 (80) gm 1.15 gm Total weight Weight of endocirne pancreas Measurements 3.8x4.5x18 cm Parotid glands : Weight (each) Pituitary gland (hypophysis) : Weight
504 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiina & Roga Vijfiana Placenta : Weight at term Gin nonpregnant woman) Weight (in parous woman) © Appendix IT Significance of the abnormal values Significance of Hb value Low Hb Values - A. Anaemia High Hb Values A. Polycythemia Rubra Vera (PRV) B. Secondary Erythrocytosis (Kidney Tumours, Leiomyoma uterus, High altitude, Hy- poxia, Chronic pulmonary disease, Congential Heart diseases and Cigarette Smoking) Leucocytosis (TLC More than 11,000/cumm) | . Pregnancy . Exercise : . Leukaemoid Reaction . Diabetic and Uremic Coma Infectious mononucleosis Bacterial and Viral infections . Leukaemias . Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia (CML) Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) “ROM ONwW > Leucopenia (TLC less than 4000/cu.mm) . Aplastic anaemia . Hypersplenism . Typhoid . Para Typhoid fever . Drug induced leucopenia Radiation and cytotoxic therapy DAUQw > 34 Vik. & Roga
506 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Appendix 507 G. Megaloblastic Anaemia . Pernicious anaemia H. Subleukemic leukaemia SLE Significance . Gaucher’s disease ‘8 . Cachexia Increased Red Cell Count A. Physiologic- New borns mamoow Anaphylactic shock: Neutrophilia (More than 75% neutrophils) , 1. Acute Infections (By bacteria, fungi, parasites and some viruses) B. Poly Cythemia Rubra Vera— A Chronic Myelopro- liferative disorder C. Secondary polycythemia A. Pneumonia e Dehydration B. Acute Appendicitis e Hypoxia— at high altitude C. Salpingitis e Renal cell carcinoma D. Peritonitis e Uterine myomas E. Abscess e Hemangioblastoma of cerebellum F. Acute Tonsillitis e Pheochromocytoma G. Actinomycosis Decreased Red Cell Count A. Poliomy clitis I Furuncle A. Anemia J. Carbuncle B. Haemodilution 2. Intoxication Neutropenia (Less than 40% neutrophils) 1. Infections A. Uraemia B. Diabetic ketosis A. Typhoid 5 poisoning by chemicals B. Brucellosis 7 Selampsia C. Measles 3. Inflammation From Tissue Damage D. Malaria A. Burns E. Kala azar B. Ischaemic necrosis G. Miliary tuberculosis C. Gout 2. Drugs and chemicals and physical agents A. Anti metabolitis B. Benzene D. Hypersensitivity reaction Lymphoctosis (More than 50% lymphocytes) C. Nitrogen mustard ; 1. Acute Infections D. Irradiation A. Pertusis 3.. Haematological and Other Diseases B. Infectious mononucleosis C. Viral hepatitis A. Aplastic anaemia P
508 Ayurvediya Viktti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Appendix 509 2. Chronic Infections B. Hook worm C. Tape worm D. Echinococcosis 3. Skin Diseases A. Pemphigus B. Dermatitis herpetiformis C. Erythema multiforme A. Tuberculosis B. Brucellosis C. Secondary syphilis 3. Haematopoietic Disorders A. CLL , B. NHL 4. Acute Haemorrhage 4. Pulmonary Diseases A. Loeffler’s syndrome B. Tropical Eosinophilia A. Acute ‘haemorrhage 5. Neoplastic conditions A. Myeloid leukaemia (CML) B. Polycythaemia vera C. Myelofibrosis D. Disseminated Cancers 5. Haematopoietic Diseases A. Chronic Myeloid Lenkaemia B. Polycythaemia vera C. Hodkin’s disease D. Pernicious anaemia 6. Miscellaneous Conditions A. Rheumatoid arthritis B. Polyarteritis nodosa C. Sarcoidosis D. Irradiation 6. Miscellaneous Conditions A. Administration of corticosteroids B. Idiopathic neutrophilia Lymphopenia (Less than 20% lymphocytes) - A. Aplastic anaemia B. High dose of:steroid administration C. AIDS Eosinophenia (Less than 1% Eosinophils) D. Hodkin’s disease E. Irradiation A. Steroid administration B. Acute infections Eosinophilia (More than 6% eosinophils) C. Acromegaly | t 1. Allergic Disorders | D. Pheochromocytoma A. Bronchial Asthma | Monocytosis (More than 10% monocytes) B. Urticaria 1. Bacterial Infections C. Hay fever A. Tuberculosis D. Drug hypersensitivity B. SABE 2. Parasitic Infections : : C. Syphilis A. Round worm 2. Protozoal Infections A. Malaria
510 Ayarvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana B. Kala azar C. Trypanosomiasis 3. Haematopoietic Disorders A. Monocytic leukaemia B. Hodkin’s disease C. Multiple myeloma D. Myelo proliferative disorders 4. Miscellaneous Conditions A. Sarcoidosis B. Cancer of ovary, breast, stomach Basophilia (More than 1% basophils) A. Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia . Polycythemia vera . Myxoedema . Ulcerative colitis . Hodkin’s disease Urticaria pigmentosa Basophillopenia (Less than 1% basophils) A. Infections B. Allergic conditions C. Myocardial infarction ESR Significance Increased ESR A. Tuberculosis . SABE (Sub acute bacterial endocarditis) . Acute Myocardial Infarction . Rheumatoid Arthritis Systemic Lupus Erythematosus - Ankylosing Spondylitis - Hypergammaglobulinaemias - Multiple Myeloma 7AMmoaw cTaMmMMOAOw Appendix I. Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia J. Shock K. Liver disease L. Pregnancy M. Anaemias Decreased ESR A. Polycythemia rubra vera . Sickle cell anaemia . Hypofibrinogenemia in liver disease . Cogestive heart failure New born infant . Spherocytosis 7~MmUuaAw Semen Analysis Gross Examination Abstinence : 3-5 days Method of collection : Masturbation/Coitus interptus/Pe- nile vibrator. Liquefication time =: Less than 40 min. Appearance : Normal/mucoid/gelatinous bodies. Colour : Greyish white/yellowish white/ milky white. Volume : 2-5 ml (1.5-6ml) pH : Alkaline 7.5-7.8 (7.2-8.5) Viscosity : Normil or increased Sperm count : 20-250 million/m! Motility : RLP-Rapid linear progressive---- 25% : SLP-Slow linear progressive: 50% NP----Non Progressive ; IMM-Immotile Morphology Avasadiya Indications for sperm analysis A. Infertility + Normal (30%) or Abnormal (70%)
512 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana B.. Medico legal utility-in rape cases-vaginal C. Pool smear for sperms taken. Significance Normozoospermia Count more than 20 millions and less than 250 millions with RLP 25% motility or SLP 50% or SLP+RLP 50%, Oligozoospermia : Less than 20 millions Asthenozoospermia : Less motility Terazoospermia : Abnormal forms more than 70% Azoospermia : No sperms even after centrifugation. Necrozoospermia : : . 100% immotile Pyospermia: More than 5 pus cells/hpf. Blood Urea (BU) Significance Pre renal A. Reduced blood flow. to kidney B. Shock - Blood loss . Dehydration Fever Haemolysis. . Burns ammua Renal . Acute renal failure . Glomerulonephritis . Malignant Hypertension . Renal cortical necrosis . Chronic renal disease moan > » ry Appendix 513 F. Diabetes mellitus G. Pyelonephritis Post renal A. Urethral destruction by stones B. Tumour C. Inflammation D. Obstruction of bladder neck Decreased BU A. Liver failure B. Over hydration C. Malnutrition Serum Creatinine Raised serum creatinine A. Severe permanent renal damage B. Other causes mentioned under blood urea. Decreased creatinine A. Muscular dystrophy Serum Bilirubin Significance Conjugated (Indirect) Hyperbilirubinemia A. Haemolytic disorders like haemoglobinopathies B. Liver disease-hepatitis & cirrhosis C. Post viral hepatitis Conjugated (Direct) Hyperbilirubinemia Intrahepatic A. Cholestasis B. Cirrhosis C. Hepatitis D. Alcoholic liver disease E. Primary biliary cirrhosis
- i 1 514 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiina & Roga Vijfiana Appendix 515 Extra hepatic obstructions A. Gall stones B. Carcinoma of bile duct and Pancreas C. Bile duct stricture Interpretation of CRP, ASLO and RA Factor Normal Values : CRP 5 mg/L F. Pernicious Anaemia G. Haemolytic Jaundice H. Hyperthyroidism I. Severe infections Blood Glucose Significance : A. Persistant Hyperglycemia ASLO 200 IU/ML +/-15% B. Diabetes mellitus Rheumatoid factors : 20[U/ML C. Acromegaly CRP Agglutination indicates Positive D. Obesity ASO titer more than 200ml + 15 indicates positive in adults E. Transient Hyperglycemia More than 300+/-indicates Positive in children F. Pheochromocytoma Rheumatoid factor : more than 20 IU/ML indicates positive G. Severe liver disease Increased titer indicates severity of the disease H. Shock ASLO Titers : I. Convlusions (200, 400, 800, 1200, 1600) Rheumatoid factors : (20, 40, 80, 120, 160) Persistent Hypoglycemia A. Insulinoma B. Hypopitutarism C. Acute alcohol ingestion D. Severe liver disease Serum Cholesterol Elevated Cholesterol . . E. Functional hypoglycemia A. Cardio vascular disease ‘ B. Atherosclerosis - Clotting Times is Prolonged in C. Obstructive Jaundice A. Severe deficiency of coagulation factors D. Hypothyroidism B. Afibrinogenaemia E. Uncontrolled Diabetes C. Administration of heparin ; F. Nephrotic Syndrome | D. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (Dic) G. Obesity | E. Administration of drugs such as anticoagulants Decreased level of Cholesterol ‘ Bleeding time is Prolonged A. Malabsorption A. Thrombocytopenia B. Liver disease , B. Disorders of platelet functions C. Hyperthyroidism C. Acute leukaemias D. Anaemia D. Aplastic anaemias E. Sepsis E. Liver disease
516 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana F. Von Willebrand’s disease G. DIC H. Abnormality in the wall of blood vessels I. Administration of drugs prior to test i.e. aspirin Diseases Causing A. Polycythaemia * B. Dehydration due to sevére vomitings, diarrhoea and profuse sweatings C. Burns D. Shock Diseases Causing Low PCV A. Anaemia B. Pregnancy Thrombocytopenia (Decreased platelet count) (Less than 1,00,000 platelets/ml) 1. Impaired Platelet Production . Aplastic anaemia . Acute leukaemias . Myelo fibrosis . Marrow infiltration by malignancy rugs (e.g. chloram i iazi i comes ee nphenicol, thiazides, anticancer drugs) 2. Accelerated Platelet Destruction . ITP SLE AIDS CLL DIC Giant haemangioma . Drug induced (e.g. sulfonamides, quinine, gold) - Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia Splenomegaly Massive transfusion of blood TMU we > “PO mM OA D> Appendix 517 Thrombocytosis (increased platelet count) (Platelet count more than 4,00,000/ml) . Essential thrombocytosis . Chronic infection . Haemmorrhage . Post operative state . Malignancy . Post splenectomy AMO wp Volume Abnormality -~ > . A. Nocturia—It means when urine is passed in excess of 500 ml during night. It indicates early renal failure? B. Polyurea-It means excess of urine is passed in 24 hours (>2500 ml) - a. Physiological . Excess water consumption During winter b. Pathological Diabetes mellitus Diabetes insipidus Chronic kidney disease _ Mental disorders : Primary aldosteronism — oa pH Variation Acidic Urine is due to A. High protein intake, e.g. meat B. Ingestion of acidic fruits C. Respiratory and metabolic acidosis D. UTI by E. Coli Alkaline Urine is due to A. Citrus fruits B. Vegetables C. Respiratory and metabolic alkalosis D. UTI by proteus, pseudomonas
518 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfidna Significance of Specific Gravity 1. Low Specific Gravity of Urine Occurs in A. Excess water intake B. Diabetes insipidus 1. High Specific Gravity of Urine is Observed in A. Dehydration B. Albuminuria C. Glycosuria 3. Fixed Specific Gravity (1.010) of Urine is Seen in A. ADH deficiency B. Chronic nephritis Causes of Proteinuria 1. Heavy Proteinuria (>3 gm/day) Occurs Due to A. Nephrotic syndrome B. Renal vein thrombosis C. Diabetes mellitus D. SLE E. Multiple myeloma F. Pyelo nephritis 2. Mild Proteinuria (<1gm/day) Occurs in A. Hypertension B. Polycystic kidney C. Chronic pyelonephritis D. UTI E. Fever 3. Microalbuminuria is excretion of 20-200 mg/L of albumin and it is indicative of early and possibly reversible glomerular damage. Causes of Glycosuria A. Diabetes mellitus B. Renal glycosuria C. Severe burns D. Administration of corticosteroids Appendix 519 E. Severe sepsis F. Pregnancy G. Alimentary glycosuria H. I. V. infusion of glucose I. Increased intracranial tension Causes of Ketonuria . Diabetic keto acidosis . Dehydration . Hyperemesis gravidarum . Fever Cachexia After general anaesthasis 'G. Eclampsia H. Starvation I. Von Gierke’s disease namo aAwW> Causes for Bile Salts in Urine A. Obstructive jaundice Causes for Increased Urobilinogen in Urine A. Haemolytic jaundice B. Haemolytic anaemia Causes for Absent Urobilinogen in Urine A. Obstructive jaundice Causes of Bilirubinuria A. Obstructive jaundice B. Hepato cellular jaundice Microscopic Examination of Urine e@ Cells (Red cells, Pus cells, Epithelial cells) e Crystals (Uric acid, Calcium oxalate, Calcium carbonate) e Casts (Hyaline, Granular, Cylindroids, Fatty, Leuco- cyte cell, Red cell, Waxy, Epithelial) e Malignant cells (Demonstrable in renal/bladder magli- gnancies) : e Parasites (Trichomonas, Ova of Schistosoma hemato-
520 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana bium, Microfilaria) © Other cells (Spermatozoa, Yeast cells) Cells Significance Red Cells Due to Kidney pathology - Nephrolithiasis - Renal cell Carcinoma » Renal infarct . Acute glomerulonephritis Malignant Hypertension. . Bacterial endocarditis affecting kidney - Ploycystic kidneys UTI Trauma MOM MU Ow> cm Due to bladder/prostate pathology . Cystitis . Carcinoma: Prostate . Carcinoma bladder . Urethritis - Bladder Lithiasis Miscellaneous MOOw> . Urethritis . Instrumentation of urinary. tract - Blood diseases . Coagulation disorders . Severe thrombocytopenia Acute: leukaemia . Sickle cell disease . Physiological OmAMODAw> A. Following Severe excercise B. Smoking C. Lumbar lordosis Causes of Blood in Urine A. Renal stones Appendix Renal tumours Polycystic kidney . Bleeding disorders Trauma . Paroxysmal Nocturnal Haemoglobinuria-PNH . Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria~-PCH . Severe burns Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia - Snake bite . Black water fever (Falciparum malariae) WBCs are Seen in Urine in Following Conditions Acrmammuay Pathological . UTI . Cystitis . Prostatitis . Chronic pyelonephritis . Renal stones . Renal tumours tmouowp> Increased epithelial cells along with WBCs are indicative of inflammation. Hyaline Casts are Passed in Following Conditions A. Fever B. Exercise C. Acute glomerulo nephritis D. Malignant hypertension E. Chronic renal disease Red Cell Casts are Passed in Following States. A. Acute glomerulo nephritis B. Renal infarct C. Good pasture syndrome D. Lupus nephritis Leucocyte Casts are Passed in Following Conditions A. Acute pyelonephritis B. Acute glomerulo nephritis 35 Vik. & Roga
522 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana C. Nephrotic syndrome D. Lupus nephritis E. Interstitial nephritis Granular Casts are Passed in Urine in Following Conditions A. Pyelo nephritis B. Chronic lead poisoning C. Viral diseases D. Renal papillary necrosis Waxy Casts are Passed in Urine in Following Conditions A. Chronic renal failure B. End stage kidney C. Renal transplant rejection Fatty Casts are Passed in Urine in Following Conditions A. Nephrotic syndrome B. Fat necrosis Epthelial Casts are Passed in Urine in Following Conditions A. Acute tubular necrosis B. Heavy metal poisoning C. Renal transplant rejection Amorphous urate crystals passed in urine in gout patients. Tyrosine crystals passed in urine in jaundice patients. Cystine crystals passed in urine in inborn error of metabo- lism, cystinuria. Miscellaneous Structures in Urine A. Spermatozoa B. Parasite C. Fungus D. Tumour cells Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) The various cells which may be seen in CSF by micro- scopic ¢xamination are: A. Neutrophils Appendix 523 B. Lymphocytes C. Plasma cells D. Monocytes E. Malignant Cells Conditions in Which Neutrophils Increased in CSF A. Bacterial meningitis B. Brain abscess C. Brain infarct ‘D. Repeated lumbar puncture Conditions in Which Lymphocytes Raised in CSF A. Viral meningitis B. Tuberculous meningitis C. Parasitic meningitis D. Fungal infections Conditions Causing Plasma Cells in CSF A. Tuberculous meningitis B. Syphilitic meningo encephalitis C. Multiple myeloma D. Malignant brain tumours Conditions Causing Lymphocytes and Monocytes in. CSF A. Viral meningitis B. Degenerative brain disorders C. Tuberculous meningitis D. Fungal meningitis E. Sarcoidosis of meninges Conditions Causing Malignant Cells in CSF A. Metastatic cancers B. Leukaemias C. Lymphomas D. Medulloblastoma E. Ependymoma CSF may be Subjected to Culture of the Following A. Bacteria
Appendix 525 524 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana B. Tubercle bacilli _ aS 2 8 |feo] & 3B|= ; C. Fungus 25/28 82/88 3 24/8 . . =a 2 a es) CSF may be Required for Demonstrations of the Following a ee S3lveg 3 38 3 : : 7 : : , RB ewo,o . s og] ez A. Viral inclusions by immunostains Bs yZs $ s & g 3./38 : . =] . oa ~ B. PCR for viral DNA and tuberculosis é 2 Pa 5s Ss g = & 23)G C. ELISA for tuberculosis ~ a D. VDRL for syphilis oO 3. = Stool Eee > 2 & Three main types of microbial tests are commonly per- a6 = a§ 2 formed on feces: BS 2” Se g . wo ee =e iS) 2 A. Antibody—antigen tests, that look for a specific virus. QZ uy Ss. g g : : oo : : . : 34 $s oS ° B. Microscopic examination for intestinal Parasites and 22 Fa mea a their eggs (ova). ~ C. Routine culture. a -|é ; : . 2 am |].2 The main pathogens that are commonly looked for in fe- ° Py 3 2 a 3S & ces are as follows : ae 5 238 S i: a&|e . o ia] o 2 3 A. Salmonella and. shigella co B aa 2s S a ~*~ 2 . ae = at 2 B. Yersinia a3 2s Bez ejo/Bsl=z s C. Campylobacter 28 |338 e&&is B/212 018 D. Aeromonas 88 & 3 z ES =ej2/2e15 . = E. Candida (in Immunosuppressed e.g. AIDS or cancer lied oO ® treatment , F. Entamoeba coli G. Schistosoma mansoni H. Griardia lamblia I. Trichuris trichuria J.. Dieutamoeba histolytica/dispar 1 K. Hymenolepsis nana 4 L. Ascaris lumbricoides M. Hook worm spp. O. Strongyloides stercoralis P. Taenia spp. 0-4 lympho- 15-45 mg/dl 50-80 mg/dl cytes/ml 60-150 mm colourless appearance 2. CSF pressure 6. Bacteriology 1. Naked eye 5. Glucose 4. Proteins
INDEX Page No. Page No. Abhyantara Srotas 83 Air Epidemic (Janapadadv- Abadha 131 athsa due to. Dusta Vata)209 Abhyantara Hetu 330 Akrti Pariksa 419 Abhyantara or Kostha Akasmika 144 Marga 186 Alasya 349 Abnornial Functions of Alocaka Pitta 11 Kapha : 4 Alpayu-Short Life Span 480 Abnormal Functions of Pitta 4 Abnormal Functions of Vata 4 According to Caraka 82 According to Susruta 82 According to Sarangadhara 170 According to Sarangadhara 82 Aendra Satva (Sharing the traits of Indra) 442 Adhyatmikadi Bheda 133 Adhyatmika Vyadhi 135 -Adibala Pravrtta Vyadhi 141 Adibhautika 142 Adidaivika Vyadhi 142 Aetiological Factors for the Vitiation of Srotas 116 Agni Pa-*‘:sa-Examination of digestive fire 482 Agni Panksa 76 Agni 448 Agni 67 Ahara Sausthava 302 Ahara Sakti Pariksa 471 Aharaja Karana 152 Ama Dosa or Ama Pradosal 92 Ama Pradosa Bheda 193 Ama Utpatti Hetu 194 Ama 190 Ama 448 Amavisa 193 Amaya 130 Amaégaya Samuttha 137 AmAvrta Vata or Sama Vata Laksana 32 Aniipa Dega 485 Annavaha Srotas 89 Annavaha Srotodusti Laksana 90 Annavrta Vata Laksana 34 Anubandha Hetu 332 Anubandhya Hetu 331 Anupasgaya 361 Apasmara 230 Apatarpanottha Vikara 153 Apana Vata .@9 Apanavrta Udana Vata Laksana 26 Index 527 Page No. Page No. Apanavrta Vyana Vata Aturakule Bhavavas- Lakasya 27 thantarani 285 Arista 245 Atanka 130 Aréa 234 # Atatvabhinivesga 237 Arsa Satva (Sharing the traits of Atikrsa Person does not Rsis) 442 Tolerate 242 Artavavaha Srotas 104 = Atikréa 242 Artavavaha Srotodusti Atipravrtti 85 Laksana 105 Atisara 236° Asara/Avara Sara Purusa 452 Atisthila 239 Asatmyendriyartha Aupasargika Roga 154 Sathyoga Arthanam 322 Aupasargikadi Bheda 134 A&Smari 235 Authoritative Testimony 38! Asthi Dhatuvrddhi Laksana 55 Avalambhaka Kapha 12 ' Asthi Sara Purusa 455 Avara Ahara Sakti 472 Asthidhatu Ksaya Laksana 58 Avara Ahara Sakti 472 Asthivaha Srotas 96 Avara Pramana 468 Asthivaha Srotodusti Avara Samhanana 459 Laksana 96 Avara Satva 471 Asthyavrta Vata Laksana 33 Avarana 22 - Asta Mahagada 228 Avaraka 35 Asta Nindita Purusa 238 Avarya ; 35 Asta Sukra Dosa 100 Avara Vyayama Sakti 473, Astamga Samgraha men- Avastha Paka 69 tioned the following Avighata 302 points 212 ~Ayuso Hrasah 240 Asura Kaya (Satva) 438 Bahirvega Avastha 224 Asura Satva (Sharing the traits Bahya Hetu 330 of Asura) 444 Bahya Srotas or . ASayapakarsa Hetu 319 Bahirmukha Srotas 82 ASayapakarsa Hetu 332 Balya 482 Agukari and Cirakari 225 Bala Ksaya 312
528 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Page No. Bala Pariksa 484 Bala Visrarhsa : 312 Bala Vyapat * 312 Bhagandara 235 Bhautiki Paficamahabhita Prakrti * 434 Bhesaja Pariksa 485 Bhedavastha 326, | Bhrajaka Pitta 12 Biomorphic Pathogenic ’ Structure of Ama and Their Classification 195 Biophysical Properties of Ama : 195 Bodhaka Kapha 13 ‘Brahmakaya . 435 Brahmya Satva (Sharing the traits. of Brahma) 441” Caksurindriya Atiyoga 322 Caksurindriya Ayoga 323 . Caksurindriya Mithyayoga 323 - Caksurindriyagamya Arista : 255 Causative Factors for Epidemics 209 Causative Factors for the Increase of Dhatus 52 Causative Factors 239 Causative Factors 242 Caya and Prakopa 14 Caya 126 Page No. Characteristics of Urine in Various Disorders 406 Chayagamya Arista 267 Cirakari 225 Classification of Arista 248 Classification of Diseases Based on Prognosis 146 Classification of Diseases 170 Classification of Hetu According to Author 335 Classification of Hetu 317 Classification of Linga . Sankarya 368 Classification of Pirvarupa341 Classification of Sarnprapti363 Classification of Srotas 82 Classification of Sroto Dusti 85 Classification of Upagaya 354 Classification of Avarana 23 Classification of Vyadhi 129 ‘Clinical Features of Ojahksaya 308 Colour of the Srotas 79 Complications due to Avarana 36 Concieved by others 338 Conditions of Jihva in various disorders 418 Contagious Causes 339 Contagious Diseases 187 Contra Indications for . Nadi Pariksa 400 Index 529 Page No. Page No. Contributing Factors for Dhatustha Kapha Dosaja Vyadhiksamatva 294 Roga 221 Critical Evaluation of Ama206 Dhatustha Pitta Dosaja Critical Evaluation of the ‘ Roga 220 Srotas 112 Dhatustha Vata Dosaja Daivabala Pravstta Vyadhi 143 Roga 218 Dasavidha Partksa 376 Dhatuvrddhi Laksana 52 Daégavidha Partksa 423 Dhatvagni Paka 71 Death Information Should Diagnosis of Diseases 314 be Kept Secret 289 Diagnosis of Over Obese 242 Defect in Sperm & Ovum 338 Definition and Importance of Srotas 78 Definition of Certain Words Used Under Rupa 348 _ Degree of Dosic Vitiation 364 Deha Pariksa—Examination of Body Physique 483 Description of Manasa Prakrti in Caraka Samhita 441 Detection of findings by the organ of Hearing 379 Deéa Partksa 485 Dirghayu 479 Dhitadhikaragamya Arista 282 Dhatu 50 Dhatuksaya Laksana 56 Dhatupaka 222 Dhatustha Dosaja Roga (Diseases of Dosas due to their entry into Dhatus)218 Diagnostic Importance 368 Difference Between Ama Rasa and Ama Visa 205 Difference Between Vyadhi and Laksana 348 Difficulty in sexual inter- course 240 Diminution of Tissues 339 Diseases Having 1 Sub Types 170 Diseases Having.11 Sub Types : 169 Diseases Having 12 Sub Types 169 Diseases Having 2 Sub Types 158 Diseases Having 2 Sub Types 166 Diseases Having 2 Sub Types 170 Diseases Having 20 Sub Types 164
530 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiina Page No. Diseases Having 3 Sub Types 159 Diseases Having 3 Sub Types 170 Diseases Having 4. Sub Types 159 Diseases Having 4 Sub Types 171 Diseases Having 5 Sub Types 161 Diseases Having 5 Sub Types 166 Diseases Having 5 Sub Types 172 Diseases Having 6 Sub Types 162 Diseases Having 6 Sub Types 167 Diseases Having 6 Sub Types 173 Diseases Having 7 Sub Types 163 Diseases Having 7 Sub Types _ 167 Diseases Having 7 Sub Types 168 Diseases Having 7 Sub Types 174 Diseases Having 8 Sub Types 163 Diseases Having 8 Sub Types 168 Page No. Diseases Having 8 Sub _ Types 174 Diseases Having 9 Sub Types . 167 Diseases Having 9 Sub Types 176 Diseases of Annavaha Srotas 90 . Diseases of Asthivaha Srotas 96 Diseases of Mitravaha Srotas 101 Diseases of Majjavaha Srotas 97 Diseases of Manovaha Srotas 109 Diseases of Medovaha Srotas 96 Diseases of Marnsavaha Srotas 94 Diseases of Pranavaha Srotas 87 Diseases of Purisavaha Srotas 103 Diseases of Rasavaha Srotas 91 Diseases of Artavavaha . \ Srotas 105 Diseases of Stanyavaha Srotas 107 Diseases of Svedavaha Srotas . 104 Diseases of Udakavaha Srotas 8&9 Dosa Bhedena Tridha 146 Dosa Dusyayo Aérayaérayi Bhava 38 Dosa Gati 36 Dosa Guna 2 Dosa Hetu 328 Dosa Paka 216 Dosa Saficaya Hetu 41 Dosa Variations and Normalcy 15 Dosa 1, 447 Dosavaha Srotas 40 Dosanusara Prakupita Mitra Laksana 404 Dreams Indicating Death in Different Diseases 262 Disya 448 Dvandva Dosa Prakopa Nadi 402 Effect of Janapadadvarnsa 212 Effects of Dosic Vitiation in the Body _ 222 Eight. fold abnormalities of obese person 239 Ekarthakari 367 Ekarthakari : 368 Index 531 Page No. Page No. ‘Diseases of Sonitavaha Enumeration of Disease 363 Srotas 93 Epidemics 339 Diseases of Sukravaha Equilibrium State of Dosis ~ 1 Srotas 99 Btiological Factors for Dosa Bbala Pravrtta Srotodusti 85 Vyadhayah 136 Examination by Hearing 381 Examination by Hearing 417 Examination by Interrogation 397 Examination by Sight 390 Examination by Smell 396 Examination by Taste 394 Examination by Touch 389 Examination by Touch 417 Examination of Eye’ 417 . Examination of Life Span 479 Examination of Pulse 399 Examination of Sara 449 Examination of Stool 411 Examination of Tongue 418 Excessive Appetite 241 Excessive Perspiration 240 Excessive Thirst 241 Exogenous 338 Explorative Therapy | 352 Eyes examination Indicating Arista © 254 Factors detected by organ of Touch 380 Factors detected by organs of Sight 379
DSL Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana . Page No. -Factors detected by organs of Smell 380 Factors detected by organs’ of Taste 380. Factors Modifying Drug Action "475 Factors Which Overcome Vyadhiksamatva 292 Faulty Administration of ' Therapies 337 Foul] Smell from the Body 240 Gada 131 Gandharva Kaya 436 Gandharva Satva (Sharing the traits of Gandharva) 443 Gaurava 350 General debility 240 General effects of Vata Avarana Avarya 35 General Symptoms of Amal97 Ghranendriya Atiyoga 324 Ghranendriya Ayoga 324 Ghranendriya Mithyayoga 324 Ghranendriyagamya Arista257 Glani 253 Glani 350 Good Prognostic Signs Should be Exposed: 289 Guna of Kapha Dosa 2 Guna of Pitta Dosa 2 Guna of Vata Dosa 2 Gulma 232 Page No. Guru Laghu Vyadhita 155 Harsa 253 Hetu is divided into two kinds 318 Hetu Sankara 365 Hetu Viparita Anna 355 Hetu Viparita Augadha 355 Hetu Viparita Vihara 355 Hetu Viparitarthakari Anna358 Hetu Viparitarthakari Ausadha 358 Hetu Viparitarthakar Vihara 358 Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Anna 360 Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Ausadha 360 Hetu Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Vihara 361 Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Anna 357 Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Ausadha 357 Hetu-Vyadhi Viparita Vihara 357 Importance of Jatharagni 74 Importance of Nidana Paficaka 368 Importance of Sparganen- driya 325 Importance of Srotas in Pathogenesis 80 Index 533 Page No. Page No. Importance of the Knowledge Kapha Prakopa Laksana 121 of Avasthas 225 Kapha Prakopa Nadi 402 Importance of understanding Kapha Prasara Laksana 123 Astanindita 243 Importance of Vatadi Dosa in the Manifestation of Diseases 139 Improper Dietetics 336 Incidents Observed While Entering Patient’s House Indicating Good Prognosis 290 Indriya Pradosaja Vikaéra 65 Indriyagamya Arista 255. Inference 380 Innumerability of the types of mental faculties 446 Introduction to Janapadadvarmsa 208 Janapadadhvathsa 208 Janma Bala Pravrtta Vyadhi 140 Jatiikarna described 18 types of Ksaya 64 Javoparodhah 240 Jhrmbha 349 Ivara 131,235,310 Krechrasadhya 148 Kapha Dosa’ 3 Kapha Ksaya Laksana 21 Kapha Pittavrta Vata Laksana 32 Kapha Sancaya Laksana 120 Kapha Saficaya Hetu 48 Kapha Saficaya, Kapha Pra- kopa and Kapha Pragama 15 Kapha Vrddhi Laksana 19 Kaphaja Nanatmaja Vikaral 81 Kaphaprakopa Hetu 47 Kaphavaha Srotas 46 Kaphavaha Sroto Dusti Laksana 48 Kaphavaha Sroto Dusti Prakopa Hetu 47 Kaphavaha Sroto Dusti Vikara 48 Kaphavrta Apana Vata Laksana 31 Kaphavrta Prana Vata Laksana 29 Kaphavrta Samana Vata Laksana 30 Kaphavrta Udana Vata Laksana 30 Kaphavrta Vata Laksafa 29 Kaphavrta Vyana Vata Laksana 31 Kala Atiyoga 327 Kala Ayoga 327 Kala Mithyayoga 327 Kala 327
534 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijfiana Page No. Kalabala Pravrtta Vyadhi 142 Kalayoga 301 Karana Bheda 132 Karma Bheda 133 Kaubera Satva (Sharing the traits of Kubera) 443 Klama 349 Kledaka Kapha 13 Kopa 127 Kriyakala 119 Kustha 231 Kubera Kaya 436 Laksana Nimitta 249 Laksya Nimitta 249 Land Epidemic (Janapada- dvamsa due to Dusta Desa 211 Linga Sankarya 367 Locations of Kapha Dosa 5 Locations of Pitta Dosa 5 Locations of Vata Dosa 5 Madhumeha 233 Madhya 482 Madhyama Ahara Sakti 472 Madhyama Pramana 468 Madhyama Roga 185 Madhyama Sarhhanana 459 Madhyama Satva 470 Madhyama Sara Purusa 452 Madhyama Vyayama Sakti473 Madhyamayu—Moderate Life Span 480 Page No. Majja Sara Purusa 455 Majjadhatu Ksaya Laksana 58 Majjadhatu Vrddhi Laksana 55 Majjavrta Vata Laksana 33 Majjavaha Srotas 97 Majjavaha Srotodusti Laksana 97 Mala Pradosaja Vikara 64 Mala 61 Marhsa Sara Purusa 454 Mathsavaha Srotas 93 Marhsavaha Srotodusti Laksana 94 Mahendra Kaya 436 Mamsadhatu Ksaya Laksana 57 Mamsadhatu Vrddhi Laksana 54 Mamsavrta Vata Laksana 33 Manasa Mithyayoga 327 Ma§nasa Prakrti 435 Manasa 138 Marga Bheda 133 Manovaha Srotas 108 Manovaha Srotodusti - Laksana 109 Matsya Kaya (Satva) 440 Matsya Satva (Sharing the traits. of a fish) 445 Meda Dhatuksaya Laksana 57 Meda Sara Purusa 454 Medadhatu Vrddhi Laksana 54 Index 535 Page No. Medasavrta Vata Laksana Medovaha Srotas Medovaha Srotodusti Laksana Messengers Indicating Good Prognosis Mithya Vihara (Abnormal Activities) Mithyacara Mithyahara Movement of Dosa from Kostha to Sakha Movement of Dosas from Sakha to Kostha Midha Garbha Murcha Mircha Mitra Ksaya Laksana Mitra Karma Mitrapariksa Mitravrddhi Laksana Mitravaha Srotas Mitravaha Srotodusti Laksana Mitravrta Vata Laksana Nanatmaja Vikara Nidana Nidana Paficaka Nidana Nidanarthakara Roga Nimittanurupa Nirama Kapha Laksana 33 94 95 289 - 337 137 136 38 38 235 310 350 63 62 404 62 100 101 34 176 37 314 87 366 250 199 Page No. Nirama Laksanas in General 199 Nirama Mitra Laksana 203 Nirama Pitta Laksana 199 Nirama Purisa Laksana 203 Nirama Sveda Laksanas 203 Nirama Vata Laksana 198 Normal Functions of Dosés 2 Obstruction for Normal Path 339 Ojo Nirodhaja Jvara 309 Ojo Vrddhi Laksana 309 ' Ojo Visrarhsa 308 Ojo Vyapat 308 Ojovaha Srotas 306 Ojovaha Srotodusti Hetu 307 Ojovaha Srotodusti Laksana 307 Ojovaha Srotodusti Vikara 309 Pandu 311 Paigaca Satva (Sharing the traits of Pigaca) 444 Pakvasgaya Samuttha 137 Panduroga 236 Pacaka Pitta 10 Papma. 131 Pagava Satva (Sharing the traits of Pasgava) 445 Parabhisarnskaraja 145 Pathi Cautpatikarh 284 Pathogenesis of Eight Fold Dosas of Sthila Person 240
536 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijiiana Page No. Page No. Pathogenesis 362 Physiological of Pittaja Pathogenic Organisms 338 Prakrti 430 Pathological Conditions of Physiological of Slesmaja Nadi in Various Diseases 402 Prakrti 427 Pathophysiology of Obesity 241 Paficabhitagni 70 Pagu Kaya (Satva) 440 Physical Characteristics Marhsa Sara Purusa 454 Physical Characteristics of Asthi Sara Purusa 455 Physical Characteristics of Majja Sara Purusa 456 Physical Characteristics of Meda Sara Purusa 455 Physical Characteristics of Pittaja Prakrti 429 Physical Characteristics of Raktasara Pursusa 453 Physical Characteristics of © Tvak Sara Purusa 453 Physical Characteristics of Vataja Prakrti 432 Physical Characteristics. of Slesmaja Prakrti 427 Physio Psychological Charac- teristics Marhsa Sara Purusa 454 Physio psychological Character- istics of Raktasara Pursusa 454 Physiological Characteristics of Vataja Prakrti 433 Physiological State of Pulse 401 Physio-psychological Charac- teristics Asthi Sara Purusa 455 Physio-psychological character- istics of Majja Sara Purusa 456 Physio-psychological Cha- racteristics of Meda Sara Purusa 455 Physio-psychological Cha- racteristics of Tvak Sara Purusa 453 Physio-psychological Cha- racteristics of Sukra Sara Purusa 457 Physio-psychological Characteristics of Satva Sara Purusa 458 Pitta Aggravating Factors 45 Pitta Dosa 3 Pitta. Ksaya Laksana 20 Pitta Prakopa Laksana 121 Pitta Prakopa Nadi 401 Pitta Prasara Laksana 123 Pitta Sancaya Laksana 120 Pitta Saficaya Hetu 46. Pitta Saficaya, Pitta Prakopa .. and Pitta Pragama 15 Pitta Vrddhi Laksana 18 Index ; _ Page No. Pittaja Nanatmaja Vikara 179 Pittaja Prakrti Characteristics 428 Pittaprakopa Hetu 44 Pittavaha Srotas 43 Pittavaha Sroto Dusti Laksana 46 Pittavaha Sroto Dusti Prakopa. Hetu 44 Pittavaha Sroto Dusti Vikara 46 Pittavrta Apana Vata Laksana 31 Pittavrta Pranavata Laksana 29 Pittavrta Samana Vata Laksana 30 Pittavrta Udana Vata Laksana 29 Pittavrta Vata Laksana 28 Pittavrta Vyana Vata Laksana “31 Pisaca Kaya (Satva) - 439 Prajfiaparadha 326 Prakrti Hetu ~ 332 Prakrti Paxiksa 485 Prakrti 424 Prakkevala and Anyalaksana 155 Prakopa 120 Prameha 311 Pram4na Pariksa According to Sugruta 462. Pramana Pariksa 459 | 36Vik. & Roga | 537 Page No. Prasara stage 121 Pratyaksa Pariksa and Anumana Pariks& 378 Pratyakhyeya (Absolute incurability 149 Pratyutpanna Karma 145 Pragama or Sama 127 Prasna Pariksa 378 Pravara Ahara Sakti 472 Pravara Pramana 468 Pravara Sarnhanana 459 Pravara Satva 470 Pravara Vyayama Sakti 473 Prayogapariguddha 368 Premonitory Symptoms 340 Preta Kaya (Satva) 439 Preta Satva (Sharing the. traits of Preta) 445 Process of Collection of Urine 404 Process of Digestion 73 Process of Examination of Pulse 399 Process of Manifestation of Dreams 262 Process of Metabolic Transformation 71 Prodromal Features of _ Ama 197 Production of Ama at Various Levels 195 ‘Prana Vata 6
538 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Page No. Pranava Srotodusti Laksana 87 Pranavaha Srotas 86 Pranavrta Samana Vata Laksana 25 Pranavrta Udana Vata Laksana 26 Pranavita Vyana Vata Laksana 25 Pradhanika Hetu 322 . Prakrta Dhatu. Karma (Fun- ctions of normal tissues) 50 Prakrta Hetu 331 Prognosis of Internal Path of Diseases 186 Prognosis of Oja and Bala Abnormalities 313 ’ Prognostic Importance of Nidana Paficaka Prominent features of : AtikrSa individual are 243 : Properties of Dosanusara Mala Laksana 411 Psychological Character- istics of Pittaja Prakrti Psychological Character- istics of Vataja Prakrti 433 Psychological Character- istics of Siesmaja Prakrti 428 Pulse in Various Patho- logical States 401 Pulse Indicating Poor 370 430 Prognosis : 403° Page No. Purisa Ksaya Laksana 63. Purisa Karma 62 - Purisavrddhi Laksana 62 Purisavaha Srotas 102 Purisavaha Srotodusti Laksana 102 Pirva Karmaja 145 Pirvarupa is of 2 Types 341,342 Piirvarupagamya Arista 258 ' Qualities of Raktadhatu Malarupi Pitta 204 Qualities of Rasa Dhatu Malarupi Kapha 204 Rajasika Prakrti 443 Rajayaksma 234 Rajayaksma- 311 Raksasa Kaya (Satva) 438 Raksasa Satva (Sharing the traits of Raksasa) 444 Raktadhatu Ksaya Laksana 56 Raktadhatu Vrddhi Laksana53 Raktaja Nanatmaja Vikdra 182 Raktapitta _ 231 Raktasara Pursusa 453 Raktavrta Vata Laksana 32 Rafijaka Pitta 11 Rasadhatu Ksaya Laksana 56 Rasadhatu Vrddhi Laksasna 53 Rasaendriya Mithyadyoga 324 Rasanendriya Atiyoga 324. Rasanendriya Ayoga 324 Rasanendriyagamya Arista257._ Index 539 Page No. Page No. Rasavaha Srotas 90 Sadyomaranamindriya Rasavaha Srotodusti Arista 274 Laksana 91 Sama Prakrti Persons © 434 Rauksya 253 Samana Vata 8. Results of Various Dreams263 Saméanavrta Apana Vata Ristabhasa 246 Laksana 25 Rogt Pariksa 372 Samanavrta Vyana Vata Roga Marga 183: Laksana ; 27 Roga Pariksa 372 Sama Asthidhatu Laksana 201 Roga 131 Sama Kapha Laksana 199. Role of Ojas in the Genesis of Various Disorders 309 Rsi Satva (Kaya) 437 Rtu Kriyakala 126 Rtu Pariksi- examination of seasons Rupa Indicating Imminent 481 Death 264 Rupa 344 Sabdavaha Srotas 107 Sadhaka Pitta : 11. Sadharana Desa 486 Sakuna Kaya (Satva) . 438 Sakha Marga or Bahya _ Roga Marga 184 Sakuna Satva (Sharing the traits of a Sakuni or Bird) 445 Sarnhanana Partksa 458 Sathsargaja Prakrti 434 Samsargaja Vikara 140 - Sathsargaja 144 Sama Mitra Laksanas Sama Majjadhatu Laksana 201 Sama Medadhatu Laksana 201 Sama Mamsadhatu 202 Laksana 200° Sama Pitta Laksana 198 Sama Purisa.Laksana 202 Sama Raktadhatu Caksana 200 Sama Rasadhatu Laksana 200. Sama Sveda Laksana 203 Sama Vata Laksana 197 Sama Sukradhatu Laksana 201 Sama 193. Samanya Pirvarupa 342 Samanya Pirvarupa 343 Sémanyaja Vikara 157 Satvika Kaya—7 in number 435 Sanga 86 Sanghata Bala Pravrtta Vyadhi 142 Sancaya 120 Sannikrsta Hetu | 319
540 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana Page No. Sannipatika Dosa Prakopa Nadi 402 Santarpanottha Vikara 152 Sapta Dhatu 50 Sarpa Kaya (Satva) © ». 438 Sarpa Satva (Sharing the traits of Sarpa or Snake) 444 Sarva Dhatvavrta Vata Laksana 34 Sarva Sara/Pravara Sara Purusa 452 ’ Sarvavaha Srotas . 48 Sarvavaha Sroto Dusti Vikara 49 Sarira Mithyayoga 326 Sarira ' 138 Satva Pariksa 469 Satva Parikgai 484 Satva Sara Purusa 458 Satmya Pariksa 485 Satmya 468 Satvika Kaya Manasa Prakrti 435 Season Epidemic (Janapada- dvarnsa due to Dusta Kala) 212 Sign 352 Significance of Sara Examination 451 Signs and symptoms in eye due to Pittaja eye disorders 417 Page No. Signs and symptoms in eye due to Vataja eye Disorders 417 Signs and Symptoms of eye due to Kaphaja eye disorders 418 Signs of Good Prognosis 291 Signs of Imminent Death 269 Signs of Impending Death 287 Sira granthi 86 Sites of Nadi Pariksa 399 Slesaka Kapha 14 Slesmaja Prakrti 426 Smell Indicating Arista 253 Sneha Indicating Arista 253 Sosa 310 Sonitavaha Srotas 91 Sonitavaha Srotodusti _ Laksana 93 Spargana Pariksa 377 SparSanendriya Atiyoga 325 Sparganendriya Ayoga 325 SparSanendriya Mithyayoga 325 Sparganendriyagamya Arista 258 Specific Symptomatology of Ama. 197 Sravanendriya Atiyoga 323 Sravanendriya Ayoga 323 Sravanendriya Mithy4- yoga 323 Index 541 Page No. Page No. Sravanendriyagamya Arista Sugrutokta Dvadasa 257 Pariksa 377, 479 Srotas 78,448 Svabhava Bala Pravrtta Srotodusti 448 Vyadhi 144 Srotovedha Laksana 81 Svabhavasamsiddhi 301 Stages occuring due to change in the condition of Ama and Agni 224 Stages occuring due to changes in Dosa. 216 Stages Occuring Due to Changes in Dusya (Dha- tugata Avastha) ‘217 Stages Occuring due to Sroto Vaisamya. 224 Stanyavaha Srotas 106 Stanyavaha Srotodusti Laksana 107 Sthanasarméraya Stage 124 Strength of Disease 365 Structure of Srotas 79 Structure of Vatavaha Srotas 40 Sukha Sadhya 147 Suddha Prakrti 441 Sukra Sara Purusa 456 Sukradhatu Ksaya Laksana59 Sukradhatu Vrddhi Laksana55 Sukravaha Srotas 98 Sukravahia Sroto Dusti Laksana 98 Sukravrta Vata Laksana 34 Svapnagamya Arista 260 Svaravaha Srotas 111, Svaravaha Sroto Dusti Laksana 111 Svatantra Paratantra Roga 156 Sveda Ksaya Laksana 64 Sveda Karma 62 Svedavrddhi Laksana 63 Svedavaha Srotas 103 Svedavaha Srotodusti Laksana 104 Symptom 352 Symptoms of Disturbed Sasnjfiavaha Srotas 110 Syndrome 352 Synonyms of Nidana 316 Synonyms of Pulse 400 Synonyms of Rupa 346 Synonyms of Sathprapti 363 Synonyms of Srotas 79 Synonyms of Vyadhi 129 Taila Bindu Partksa 405 Tamasika Prakrti 445 Tandra 348 © Tarpaka Kapha 13 Taste Indicating Arista 253
/ 542 Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijfiana & Roga Vijfiana Page No. . Page No. The following diseases Upadhatu Pradosaja manifest in Atikréa Vikara 60 individual 243 Upadhatu 51 The Following Persons Upadrava 214 are Unable to Resist Utkleéga 349: Diseases 293 Utpadaka Hetu 329 Therapeutic Importance of Utthana and Gambhira Nidana Paficaka 370 Stage 223 Time Factors 365 Vaikrta Hetu 331 Time Period for Pacifi- Vagvahini Srotas 105 _ cation\or Kill 310 Vak Mithyayoga 326 TouchIndicating Arista 254 Vanaspatya Kaya (Satva) 440 Ivak Sara Purusa 453 Vanaspatya Satva (Sharing Ubhaya Hetu 329 the traits of vegetable Ubhaya 138 life) 446 Ubhayarthakari 367 Varcasavrta Vata Laksana 34 Ubhayarthakari 368° Variety of Diseases 364 Ubhayatmaka 145 Various methods of Rogi Udakavaha Srotas 88 Pariksa . 375 Udakavaha Sroto Dusti . Varuna Kaya 436... Laksana 88 Varuna Satva (Sharing the Udanavrta Vyana Vata traits of Varuna) 442 Laksana 27 Vata Caya 14 Udara Roga 232 Vata Dosa . 2 Udana Vata - 7 Vata’ Ksaya Laksana 20 Udanavrta Apana Vata Vata Prakopa and Vata Laksana 26 Pragama 14 Udanavrta Prana Vata . Vata Prakopa Laksana 121 Laksana 26 Vata Prakopa Nadi 401 Udanavrta Prana 311 Vata Prasira Laksana 123 Unmada 237 Vata Sancaya Laksana 120 Unseen Factor 338 ' Vata Saficaya Hetu 41 Index _ 543 Page No. Vata Vrddhi Laksana Vata Vyadhi 16 230 Vataja Nanatmaja Vikara 176 Vataja Prakrti Chara- cteristics Vataprakopa Hetu Vatavaha Srotas Vatavaha Sroto Dusti Laksaya Vatavaha Sroto Dusti Prakopa Hetu Vatavaha Sroto Dusti Vikara 432 41 40 43 41 43 Vaya Pariks4—Examination of Age Vaya Pariksa Vidradhi Viharaja Karana Vikrti Hetu 482 473 236 152 332 Vikrti Pariksa-Examination of Morbidity Vikrti Vikara Vikara’s Vimargagamana Viprakrsta Hetu Visesa Pirvarupa Voice Indicating Arista Vrddha Vyabhicari Hetu Vyaktavastha Vyafijaka Hetu 447 249 131 153 86 320 -342 253 483 321 125- 330 Page No. Vyadhi Hetu 328 Vyadhi Kriyakala 119 Vyadhi Nanatve Hetu 182 Vyadhi Pariksa - Examina- tion of Diseases 154 Vyadhi Partksa- Exam- ination of diseases 481 Vyadhi Sankara 368 Vyadhi Viparita Anna 356 Vyadhi Viparita Ausadha356 Vyadhi Viparita Vihara 357 Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Anna 359° Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Ausadha _ : 359 Vyadhi Viparitarthakari Vihara 359 Vyadhi 129,130 Vyadhi’s 152 Vyadhi-avastha 215 Vyadhiksamatva 292 Vyadhyasraya 188 Vyana Vata 7 Vyanavrta Apana Vata Laksana 27 Vyanavrta Prana Vata Laksana 25 Vyayama Sakti Pariksa 472 Water Epidemic (Janapadadvarhsa due to Dusta Jala) 210 Yaksma 130.
544° Ayurvediya Vikrti Vijiiana & Roga Vijiiana Page No. Yamya Satva (Kaya) 437 Yamya Satva (Sharing the traits of Yama) 442 Yapya (Manageable Diseases) 4 149 ‘1 Type of Disease 158 1 Type of Vyadhi 132 11Pairs According to Sufruta 84 15 Type of Prasara 122 2 Fold examination 375 2 Types of Diseases 132 2 Types of Hetu3 18,319,329, 330, 331,332 2. Types of Vyadhi 145 2 Types of Vyadhi 157 20 Types of Annyon-. yavarana Vata 23. 20 Types of Prameha 165 20 Types of Yoni Vyapat 165° 3 Fold Etiological Factors 322 3 Fold examination 375 3 Fold examination 377 - Page No. 3 Subtypes of Hetu 328 3 Types of Diseases 132 3 Types of Hetu 317,318,319 3 Types of Hetu 318 3 Types of Hetu 319 3 Types of Ayatana 317 3 Varieties of Diseases 135 4 Fold examination 375 4 Types of Diseases 183 4 Types of Hetu 317 4 Types of Roga’s 134 5 Types of Kapha 12 5 Types of Pitta 10 5 Types of Roga 134 5 Types of Vata 6 6 Fold examination 375 6 Fold Examination 381 7 Varieties of Diseases 134 7 Varieties of Diseases 15] 7 Varieties of Vyadhi 134 8 fold examination technique 376 8 folds of Examination 398
